THE STATE OF
VERMONT'S CHILDREN
2023 YEAR IN REVIEW
GOVERNOR
I’m pleased to help introduce the 2023 issue of this report, which serves as a
useful tool for understanding the status of the well-being of Vermont’s families and
the early childhood system. Additionally, I look forward to VermontKidsData.org
creating better data-driven decision-making on behalf of children and families.

Since I first came to office, I have tried to focus on the fundamentals. From the economy,
to infrastructure, to greater health and safety, we can revitalize areas of the state
that have been left behind for far too long and build communities our kids can
thrive in with more opportunities to succeed.

It takes a holistic approach, because all the pieces must fit together. To give our kids
the best possible start, we need to grow our workforce so we can deliver critical
services to families. To grow our workforce, we need more housing, affordable
childcare, good schools, and thriving downtowns. We also need to help families keep
more of what they earn, so they can enjoy life in Vermont, instead of just getting by.

To support community revitalization, we have prioritized considerable funding – more than $3 billion in state and federal funds since
2020 – to help more towns and villages improve the infrastructure they need to grow, and to upskill our workforce. Our children will
directly benefit from these investments. For example, we’ve invested to improve local libraries with enhanced accessibility, equipment,
and supplies; fix aging housing stock and bring more new units online; expand broadband so kids can connect with the world;
bring down the cost to become an early childhood educator; and more.

But, most importantly, strong communities begin with the people in them. We know that the most common factor for resilient children
is having at least one stable and caring relationship with a supportive parent, caregiver, or other adult. Those interactions and close
relationships build positive social emotional development and provide opportunities for adults to model civility, flexibility, and kindness.

As Vermonters, we pride ourselves on being resilient, caring about our neighbors, and developing strong relationships to solve problems
and create change. After another challenging year, this time due to historic flooding, these were again made visible. We are Vermont Strong -
and Tough Too. Our communities were significantly impacted by these events and in the wake of the damage, trauma, and loss we are
committed to supporting recovery and revitalization. Embedding these skills and values in our youngest Vermonters has never been
more important.

Once again, I want to thank the early childhood workforce and all of those who work with and support Vermont children and their families.
Without them, Vermont families and children would not have access to the care and services they deserve, and I’m deeply grateful for
their work.

Sincerely,

Philip B. Scott
Governor
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND STATE
ADVISORY COUNCIL CO-CHAIRS
The Building Bright Futures (BBF) Early Childhood State Advisory Council (SAC) Network
is honored to present the 11th iteration of The State of Vermont’s Children. We are
proud of the important role that this yearly report plays in supporting data-informed
decision-making for Vermont’s early childhood system. This is one of the ways that the
BBF Network serves as the state’s nonpartisan, independent source of data, research,
publications, and important information for policymakers and early childhood partners
on issues and priorities for children from the prenatal period through age 8 in Vermont.

We are grateful for the expertise and guidance from our partners across the early
childhood system throughout the development of this report, from informing the choice
of indicators, to providing data, answering the seemingly endless questions, and crafting
an accurate and accessible narrative. The production of this report exemplifies the power
Morgan K. Crossman, Ph.D., M.A.
of aligned vision, collaboration, and true partnership.
Executive Director
Building Bright Futures
We want to draw your attention to the 2023 Data Spotlight (page 20), which is focused
on the perinatal period, from pregnancy through one year after birth, because it is a key
time for a child’s long-term development and the well-being of the birthing parent, child,
and family system. The spotlight contains data on Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders
and Substance Use Disorder as well as opportunities for intervention.

In addition, the 2024 Policy Recommendations (page 4), developed in partnership with
Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP) Committees and Regional Councils,
are significant in scope and depth and have the potential to create strategic change
for children and families in the coming year. Alongside the data centralized in
this report, these recommendations call attention to urgent issues and priorities,
support advocacy efforts, communicate cross-sector needs and priorities, and create
accountability for policy change on behalf of the BBF Network.

Finally, as a brief reminder, the data in this report provides only a snapshot of
Ilisa Stalberg, MSS, MLSP
the state’s early childhood system. There are additional data, context, narrative,
SAC Public Co-Chair
and limitations that cannot be included in this January year in review, as many
Director, Family and Child Health
indicators across sectors are released throughout the year. VermontKidsData.org
Vermont Department of Health
serves as a hub of high-quality, up-to-date information on the status of children and
families across sectors. By consistently updating and centralizing data from the
complex early childhood system, VermontKidsData.org makes it easier for leaders,
policymakers, families, and communities to use data to make informed policy and
program decisions. The updated Early Childhood Data Portal at VermontKidsData.org
is where you can find all indicators, searchable by topics and policy area,
with straightforward visualizations, context, and the ability to download more
extensive datasets. The website includes all indicators presented in The State of
Vermont’s Children and much more!

We hope that together, this report and VermontKidsData.org will support partners across
the early childhood system in continuing to make data-informed decisions while placing
equity at the center. Using data and stories to shed light on opportunities to strengthen
and embed equity in Vermont’s early childhood system is paramount to improving the
lives of children and their families in our communities.
Flor Diaz Smith
SAC Private Co-Chair
President of VSBA Board
Vermont School Board Association
TABLE OF CONTENTS

About Building Bright Futures
1
4
2024 Policy Recommendations
9
Demographics
10
Basic Needs
14
Challenging Childhood Experiences
16
Health and Well-Being
20
Spotlight: Perinatal Health and Wellbeing
24
Child Development and Education
28
Statewide Data Snapshot
29
Addison
30
Bennington
31
Caledonia and Southern Essex
32
Central Vermont
33
Chittenden
34
Franklin and Grand Isle
35
Lamoille
36
Northern Windsor and Orange
37
Orleans and Northern Essex
38
Rutland
39
Southeast Vermont
40
Springfield Area
41
Limitations
42
Acronyms
43
References
46
Acknowledgements
ABOUT BBF

MISSION
To improve the well-being of children and families in Vermont by using
evidence to inform policy and bringing voices together across sectors
and within regions to discuss critical challenges and problem-solve.

Building Bright Futures is Vermont’s Early Childhood State Advisory
Council Network
Building Bright Futures (BBF) is charged under state and federal statute as the primary advisor to Vermont’s Governor, Administration,
and Legislature on the well-being of children and families from the prenatal period to age 8. BBF was strategically created as
a public-private partnership to serve as an independent, nonpartisan entity. BBF has five primary responsibilities:

We CONVENE early childhood partners, including policymakers, early childhood professionals, educators, health and mental
health providers, business leaders, and families.

We MONITOR the early childhood system through high-quality, up-to-date data.

We EMPOWER families and on-the-ground early childhood educators, elevating their voices to make sure their needs are represented
and their concerns are part of the conversation.

We RESPOND to the needs of Vermont’s early childhood communities by drawing on our statewide network of over 500 early childhood
partners and issuing annual Policy Recommendations based on our partners’ feedback and on robust data.

We ADVISE Vermont’s Governor, Administration, and Legislature by making data-driven recommendations to inform decision-making.

Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP)
BBF is charged to maintain and monitor the vision and strategic plan for Vermont’s early childhood system, Vermont’s Early
Childhood Action Plan (VECAP). The VECAP helps hold Vermont leaders and decision-makers accountable to working towards the
state’s early childhood system collective vision: to be an integrated continuum of comprehensive, high-quality services that
is equitable, accessible, and improves outcomes for each and every child in the prenatal period through age 8 and their family.

These are the four goals of VECAP:

All children have a healthy start.
Goal 1 
Families and communities play a leading role in children’s well-being.
Goal 2 
Children have access to high-quality opportunities that meet their needs.
Goal 3 
The early childhood system will be integrated, well-resourced, and data informed.
Goal 4 

| 
2023 Year in Review 1
ABOUT BBF

Ensuring Accountability and Data-Driven Decision-Making
BBF is committed to compiling, producing, and using the most up-to-date, high-quality data to make recommendations and inform
decision-making. Centralizing and consistently reviewing data allows us to decision-makers’ ability to identify where there are system gaps,
where duplication exists, how resources are (or are not) successful in impacting outcomes, what to prioritize, and how to evaluate progress
on existing initiatives. To help meet the need for a centralized source of data, BBF developed VermontKidsData.org, which provides
access to data across sectors visualized in a straightforward way; the ability to download full datasets for additional queries; and current
research and publications informing the early childhood system in Vermont and nationally.

BBF also publishes The State of Vermont’s Children annually in January to give Vermont’s policymakers a snapshot of the early childhood
data they need at the start of each session. With access to over 100 indicators, readers can find the data and context they need to inform decisions,
support grant proposals, and advocate for policy change.

The Vermont Early Childhood Fund
The Vermont Early Childhood Fund (VECF) supports creative solutions that will improve the well-being of children from the prenatal period
to age 8, their families, and the Vermont communities where they live. BBF recognizes that a wide variety of factors impact children during
the early stages of development. Currently funded through the Sunflower Fund at the Vermont Community Foundation and the federal
Preschool Development Grant, VECF will provide a total of $6 million in grants between 2023 and 2025.

The BBF Network
The BBF Network is made up of 500 early childhood partners across Vermont, including policymakers, early childhood professionals,
educators, health and mental health providers, business leaders, and last but certainly not least, families. Partners invested in the well-being
of Vermont children and their families engage in the BBF Network to make change. Through this Network, we have the ability to understand
the needs of every corner of the state and elevate the voices of families and communities as a trusted, data-informed advisor.

The BBF Network convenes in the following ways:
• Twelve Early Childhood Regional Councils, focused on the specific needs of each region of the state
• Seven VECAP Committees that carry out and monitor progress related to Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP)
• The Early Childhood State Advisory Council, a 23-member Governor-appointed board

Early Childhood Regional Councils
Our 12 Regional Councils bring together early childhood partners to identify gaps, share expertise and resources, elevate regional and
family voices, and implement strategies in each region of Vermont. Fully integrated into their communities, Regional Councils work to
improve access to supports across early care, health, and education in their communities. Regional Council members include mental
health counselors, home visitors, pediatricians, social workers, food shelf directors, early childhood educators, and pre-K-12 administrators;
families of children through age 8; and community members invested in the well-being of young children. Annually, each Regional Council
selects two priorities to guide their work in the region.

| 
2 The State of Vermont's Children
VECAP Committees
The seven VECAP committees are guided by the goals and objectives that Vermont has identified as essential in Vermont’s Early
Childhood Action Plan (VECAP). Annually, VECAP Committees elevate gaps and barriers impacting children and families and bring
them to the State Advisory Council to inform policy recommendations.

The Child Outcomes Accountability Team (COAT) is committed to improving the health and well-being of children and their
families by addressing systemic issues and building coordination across the health, mental health, basic needs, and early childhood
systems of care.

The Data and Evaluation Committee is charged with prioritizing data integration; creating and monitoring a data
development agenda; serving as the accountability mechanism to monitor progress toward the four goals of the VECAP; and serving
as a primary advisor for research, data, and evaluation efforts.

The Early Childhood Interagency Coordinating Team (ECICT) is composed of agency leaders committed to identifying
and reducing barriers in state government to strengthen the early childhood system. They seek to implement the VECAP
and build an integrated continuum of comprehensive, high-quality services that is equitable and accessible and will improve outcomes.

The Early Childhood Investment Committee seeks to document and monitor investments in Vermont’s children and families.

The Early Learning and Development Committee is devoted to improving the quality and capacity of services, with a focus
on alignment and best practices for children and families from childcare through early elementary education.

The Families and Communities Committee works to develop a statewide approach that enriches and expands family
partnership and leadership at the provider, agency, and community levels.

The Professional Preparation and Development (PPD) Committee’s mission is to develop, coordinate, and promote a
comprehensive system of quality learning opportunities for current and prospective early childhood and afterschool professionals.

Vermont’s Early Childhood State Advisory Council (SAC)
Vermont’s Early Childhood State Advisory Council (SAC) is the state’s Governor-appointed primary advisory body on the well-being
of children from the prenatal period through age 8 and their families. The SAC brings together 23 appointed members, with specific
public seats for Vermont State Agency and Department leads as well as private at-large seats.

Each year, in partnership with the VECAP Committees and Regional Councils, the SAC sets priorities and strategic direction for
statewide initiatives by endorsing a series of Policy Recommendations. These Policy Recommendations are developed using
the VECAP, up-to-date data, and the most pressing needs and challenges being faced in the early childhood system collected
throughout the year. The annual recommendations identify current gaps in policy, promote action in strategic areas for the coming year,
and aim to be measurable through BBF’s data collection and monitoring charge.

| 
2023 Year in Review 3
RECOMMENDATIONS & STRATEGIES

2024 Policy Recommendations of the Vermont Early
Childhood State Advisory Council Network

Vermont’s Early Childhood State Advisory Council (SAC) is the state’s Governor-appointed, primary advisory body on the well-
being of children from the prenatal period through age 8 and their families. Building Bright Futures (BBF) advises the Governor,
Administration, and Legislature on policy and systems improvements for children and their families. Each year, in partnership
with Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP) Committees and Regional Councils, the SAC sets priorities and strategic
direction for statewide initiatives by endorsing a series of policy recommendations. These annual policy recommendations
of Vermont’s Early Childhood State Advisory Council Network are developed using the VECAP, up-to-date data, and the
most pressing feedback and challenges being faced in the early childhood system collected throughout the year. The annual
recommendations identify the current gaps and needs in policy, promote action in strategic areas for the coming year, and aim
to be measurable.

ACCESS TO BASIC NEEDS (VECAP GOAL 1)

Housing and Economic Security
• Continue to invest at high levels in the creation of housing, to expand access and create more affordable housing
for Vermont families, including providing full statutory funding for the Vermont Housing and Conservation Board.
• Provide high-quality care coordination to support families in accessing housing and related services. Ensure that
families navigating affordable housing and those experiencing homelessness are both supported through these
processes and are assisted in navigating and accessing other related needs. Ensure documentation requirements
are not a prohibitive barrier for families experiencing homelessness or those navigating affordable housing services.
• Increase the Reach Up housing allowance, currently based on applicant-reported housing costs in 2001, to match
the current year’s housing costs, and adjust annually. Study how TANF housing allowances are calculated in
other states, and propose a method that accurately captures the cost of housing in Vermont.

Paid Family and Medical Leave Insurance
• Enact a Paid Family and Medical Leave Insurance program for Vermonters seeking to take time off to care for a
family member or themselves while welcoming a new child into the family, while navigating an illness or injury,
or after experiencing a loss. Ensure that the benefit through this program covers all caregivers in the case of
a two-parent household, and that the benefit is generous enough that loss of income is not a barrier for those
looking to utilize the program.

| 
4 The State of Vermont's Children
FAMILY PARTNERSHIP AND RESILIENCE
(VECAP GOAL 2)

Renewed Policy Recommendation (2022):
Guidance for Legislatively Mandated Bodies
• Develop and enact a formal guidance/protocol for naming membership when creating new legislatively mandated
bodies (study sections, councils, etc.). A membership template must include individuals with relevant and current
lived experience. This guidance should also include resources and best practices for holding accessible meetings
that are welcoming and inclusive for community and family representatives, as well as considerations for adopting
a trauma and resilience-informed lens.

Renewed Policy Recommendation (2022):
Leveraging the Findings from the Family Needs Assessment
• Utilize the findings of the 2022 Vermont Early Childhood Family Needs Assessment and future Family Needs
Assessment projects and data collection efforts of the Families and Communities VECAP Committee to inform
program implementation, policymaking, and decision-making.

Invest in Statewide Family Leadership Training Opportunities
• Invest in statewide family leadership training opportunities to prepare and support parents and caregivers with
serving on boards, commissions, etc. In order to be effective in supporting the leadership development of families
with lived experiences that will inform policymaking and decision-making, these opportunities must be free of
charge and must compensate parents/caregivers for their time and any associated child care and transportation
costs. Outreach and admissions for training opportunities must prioritize groups underrepresented in existing
Vermont family leadership circles, including parents/caregivers of color, LGBTQ+ families, and families with special
health care needs and disabilities.

| 
2023 Year in Review 5
RECOMMENDATIONS & STRATEGIES

HIGH-QUALITY AND INCLUSIVE PHYSICAL AND
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES (VECAP GOAL 3)

Invest in Perinatal Supports
• Invest in statewide strategies that center early relational health to ensure families are supported across clinical and
community settings during the critical perinatal period, including after experiencing the loss of a child or loss of a caregiver.

f Fund the expansion of Developmental Understanding and Legal Collaboration for Everyone (DULCE) approach sites.
f Invest in peer- and community-based strategies such as multiagency collaboration teams, like regional
CHARM/Community Response teams, to ensure families have the supports they need through a strength-
based approach and in recognition that Vermont’s maternal mortality incidences have a concerning overlap
with substance use disorders (SUD).
f Ensure continuity of care and high-quality services are available for the perinatal population. Expand Children’s
Integrated Services (CIS) supports past the 8-week postpartum period to the full year postpartum for the
birthing person, in alignment with postpartum Medicaid expansion.
f Pursue strategies that center equitable services and birth-related outcomes for parents/caregivers of color,
including expanding Medicaid coverage to doula services.

Mental Health
• Invest in the mental health workforce and other proven strategies that are necessary to support Vermont children
currently in high levels of crisis care in or out of state.
f Expand rate increases for mental health services provided to Designated Agencies (DAs) and Specialized
Services Agencies (SSAs) to include all mental health service providers that receive Medicaid funding.
f Ensure that rate increases for mental health services keep pace with the true rate of inflation for
those services.
f Prioritize recruiting mental health professionals that represent Vermont’s population including people
of color and disabled professionals.
• Elevate the promise of mental health integration strategies as described in the Mental Health Integration Council’s
Interim Report. Develop financial incentives and implementation support for initiatives aiming to integrate mental
health into primary care settings serving children and families to promote wellness and upstream prevention.

| 
6 The State of Vermont's Children
HIGH-QUALITY AND INCLUSIVE EARLY CARE/
EDUCATION/AFTERSCHOOL PROGRAMS
(VECAP GOAL 3)

Renewed Policy Recommendation (2022):
Universal Pre-K Access and Equity
• Within the Universal Pre-K Implementation Committee mandated under Act 76, center equity of access by examining and
making recommendations on how best to implement a full school-day, school-year prekindergarten education program
and ensuring that the vision of universal, high-quality, equitable, mixed-delivery, inclusive education for all 3-, 4-,
and 5-year-olds not yet enrolled in kindergarten is maintained. The committee should specifically address the following
related to equity in access:

f Determining how best to expand prekindergarten access from 10 hours per week to 35 hours per week while
ensuring sufficient access to year-round services for children 0-8, including early childhood education,
afterschool, and summer care
f Determining appropriate weighting for full school-day pre-K students in regards to education funding
f Examining parity between the quality, workforce qualifications, governing rules, and compensation in school-based
and private program-based pre-K programs, including comparisons to national best practices
f Ensuring that 3-year-olds are able to access Early Childhood Special Education services. Ensuring that funds for
ECSE follow the child, even outside of their home district, to improve access and reduce barriers/burdens on families
f Examining how best to provide a continuity of pre-K and related services for children in rural regions and
border regions, some of whom go on to attend kindergarten in bordering states

Screening, Assessment, and Services for Children with
Autism Spectrum Disorder or Other Developmental Delays
• Improve access to family-engaged developmental and behavioral/autism screening to improve early identification
and support timely follow-up and referral to needed services.
f Build capacity to improve access to autism assessments by training health care providers, early interventionists,
and others to conduct developmental and autism screenings and by increasing collaboration between Children’s
Integrated Services (CIS) and pediatric medical homes.
f Support families by addressing barriers to accessing assessments including assessment paperwork, transportation,
cost if not covered by insurance, and having documents in other languages and/or having interpreters available.

| 
2023 Year in Review 7
RECOMMENDATIONS & STRATEGIES

SEAMLESS, EQUITABLE, DATA-DRIVEN
SYSTEM OF CARE (VECAP GOAL 4)

Renewed Policy Recommendation (2023):
Inequities in Data Collection
• Respond to inequities in data collection and reporting in order to better represent and understand the intersectional
experiences of people of color, children with disabilities, and other marginalized communities in Vermont.

f Develop a statewide strategy to gather demographic information that allows people to self-identify in an authentic
and appropriate manner while meeting federal demographic reporting requirements.
f Value qualitative data. When the small population size of a group necessitates the suppression of their
quantitative data, utilize qualitative data collection to ensure that everyone is counted.
f Secure sustained funding to support high-quality data through compensation for direct service providers who
collect and report data.
f Partner with impacted communities throughout the data cycle to ensure that traditionally marginalized communities,
in particular, have ownership of their experiences and are empowered to advocate for and make decisions
for themselves.
f To enable Vermont to execute the above recommendations, secure sustained funding for additional personnel to
increase capacity with a specific focus on equitable data.

Make Critical Investments in Data & Technological Infrastructure
• Renewed Policy Recommendations (2020, 2021): Commit to early childhood data integration and governance through
sustained funding, dedicated staffing, data infrastructure, and data-driven accountability.
f Increase availability, coordination, and publication of cross-sector early childhood data.
f Secure data-sharing agreements and prioritize data-sharing activities and procedures.
f Fully fund and expedite the development and execution of the Child Development Division’s Information System
(CDDIS), including a module for Children’s Integrated Services (CIS) that supports data collection, monitoring,
and case management.
f New policy recommendation: Secure sufficient state funding to fully implement the Comprehensive Child Welfare
Information System (CCWIS).
f Secure sustained funding for personnel to ensure high-quality data.
• New Policy Recommendation: Invest in state agencies’ ability to execute contracts, grants, and agreements;
make payments in a timely manner; and improve efficiencies.
f Improve state agencies’ technological infrastructure, increase staff capacity, and build systems that prioritize
transparency and communication among business offices, Departments/Divisions, and organizations/payees.
f Prioritize providing accessible grant and contract opportunities that seek to reduce barriers for individuals and
organizations who face challenges when applying for or receiving grant funding, including having sufficient funds
on hand, having a bank account, and having the time, skill, and capacity to write a grant application.

| 
8 The State of Vermont's Children
DEMOGRAPHICS

The following chapters include key indicators of child and family well-being, many of which show trends
over time. Indicators show a snapshot of the status of children and families, but may not reflect the entire
context impacting outcomes.

DEMOGRAPHICS

In 2022, there were an estimated 59,173 children under the  Although the vast majority of Vermont’s population identifies as
age of 10, including 5,379 babies born to Vermont residents.  white and non-Hispanic/Latina/o/x, the state is growing more
Where Vermont’s children live aligns with Vermont’s population centers:  racially diverse, especially among young children. Table 1 shows
The Chittenden region holds 25.3% of children under age 10,  that the percentage of the population under age 10 who identify
while the St. Albans, Barre, and Rutland areas hold 10.9%, 10.3%,  as two or more races or multiracial (4.5%) is more than twice the
1
and 9.1% respectively.                     percentage of the Vermont population as a whole (2.2%). Similarly,
as seen in Table 2, 3.4% of children under age 10 identify as Hispanic
or Latino/a/x compared with 2.3% of the population as a whole. In
Table 1: Vermont Population by Race
2
total, 12% of Vermont children under 10 identify as non-white and/or
and Age Group (2022) 
2
identify with an ethnicity of Hispanic or Latina/o/x.
Children   Total
Race 
Under 10  Population
American Indian
of children under 12 lived
0.4% 0.4%
and Alaska Native 
28.5%
in households with incomes
below 185% of the federal poverty level in 2022,
Asian 2.4% 2.1%
3
the benchmark for many benefit programs.

f See page 10 for more information about basic needs.
Black or African American 2.2% 1.5%

Native Hawaiian
*** ***
and Other Pacific Islander 
474 children under age 9
4
White 90.6% 93.8%
living in out-of-home protective custody as of 9/30/23.

f For more information about challenging childhood
Two or more races 4.5% 2.1%
experiences, see page 14

Table 2: Vermont Population by Ethnicity
In 2022, there were 8,021
2
and Age Group (2022)
children under 18 living with
Children   Total
grandparents or other relatives.
Ethnicity 
Under 10  Population
5
(7.1% of children under 18). 
Hispanic or Latina/o/x 3.2% 2.2%

| 
2023 Year in Review 9
BASIC NEEDS

BASIC NEEDS

VECAP GOAL 1 :
ALL CHILDREN HAVE
A HEALTHY START

guideline for eligibility for federal programs is 185% of the FPL.
The stress of being unable to meet basic physiological needs such as
5
In 2023, 185% of the FPL for a family of four was $55,500. 
food and shelter, often due to poverty, impacts the ability of
parents and caregivers to create environments full of the warm and
1
responsive interactions that support early childhood development.
There has been a 14.7% decrease in the percent of Vermont’s
families with children under 12 living below 185% of the FPL,
Food insecurity among children harms cognitive development
2                                6 
from 33.2% in 2017 to 28.5% in 2022. 
and contributes to social and behavioral problems in school.
Despite this decrease, many
Housing instability can permanently affect brain development  Vermonters earning well above the FPL struggle to cover the cost
3 4 
in children                          of basic needs such as housing, transportation, and healthcare.
and can impact physical health. Meeting these
The reality is that the federal poverty level is not an adequate
basic needs for all families is critical to ensuring that children have
measure of family economic well-being. Inflation continues to
the opportunity to thrive.
be an important factor to consider as part of the cost of living.
Median family income rose by almost $5,800 between 2021
Cost of Living
7 
and 2022, to $96,345. 
But after adjusting for inflation, median
The cost of living is an important factor impacting access to
family income actually fell by 1.5%, which meant that families had
basic needs. There are several ways to look at this cost, from the
8
less buying power in 2022 than they had the previous year. 
federal poverty level to estimates of the living wage.

A more detailed picture of the true cost of living for Vermont families
The federal poverty level (FPL) is a national guideline used to
comes from The Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s (MIT’s)
determine eligibility for programs and services. A common
9
living wage calculator, which is updated annually in January. 
Figure 1: Vermont Wage Benchmarks for a Family of Four
MIT defines a living wage as the “hourly rate that an individual in
10, 5, 11, 7, 9
with Two Working Adults and Two Children 
a household must earn to support his or herself and their family.”
The calculator shows that in Vermont, the necessary annual income
to meet the basic needs of a household with two adults and two
$104,193
9 
$96,345 
children (before taxes) is $104,193.
As seen in Figure 1, for a family
of four the maximum Reach Up (Vermont’s Temporary Assistance
10
for Needy Families, or TANF, program) benefit is $12,000;
5 
$54,828
the 2023 FPL is $30,000; 
two adults working at Vermont’s
11 
minimum wage of $13.18
make $54,828; and the median income
7 
$30,000
in 2022 was $96,345 
—all of which are less than the living wage
$12,000
needed for a family to comfortably meet their needs in Vermont.
It is important to note that this living wage does not include funds
Maximum
Minimum
Family Median
Federal               MIT Living
for savings, emergency expenses, or expenses like meals
Reach Up
Wage
Income
Poverty Level
Wage
Benefit
(2023)
(2023)
(2022)   (2023)
in restaurants. It also does not include potential benefits that
(2022)
9
families may access depending on their income. 

| 
10 The State of Vermont's Children
finding homeownership increasingly out of reach. In 2019,
Housing and Homelessness
the inflation-adjusted median primary home sale price
Having stable housing is a critical element for children to thrive.
6,8 
was $261,215 
, while in 2022, the median home sale price
Efforts to increase access to stable housing include new state
16 
was $309,000, an 18.3% increase.
Over the same time period,
investments in affordable housing and Section 8 Vouchers, as well
from 2019 to 2022, median family household income only
as updates to zoning laws through Act 47. Despite such efforts,
increased by 0.5%. Home loan interest rates increased dramatically
access to stable and affordable housing continues to be a
over that same period of time. The 30-year fixed rate mortgage
challenge for families in Vermont.
average was 3.6% in January 2020 and 6.1% in January 2023,
17 
further increasing the price of housing. 
Of note, both rental and
To meet expected demand and address extremely low
ownership markets were impacted by the historic flooding seen in
vacancy rates, Vermont Housing Finance Agency reports that
July of 2023, which is not reflected in the data above.
Vermont will need 30,000 to 40,000 more year-round homes
by 2030. This means adding 5,000 to 6,700 more homes to
Children and Families Experiencing Homelessness
Vermont's primary home market each year, well above the 2,100
12 
homes that the state has been generating.
In 2022, the passage
and Housing Insecurity
of Act 45 created statewide zoning regulations for municipal
The trauma of homelessness, even short-term, can have a major
planning and enacted zoning changes to simplify the
effect on a child’s future development. Vermont is actively
development of more housing in municipal districts. For example,
experiencing a housing crisis, which is significantly impacting
municipalities must allow duplexes where single-family units
young children and families. Statewide efforts to provide temporary
are allowed, and municipalities must permit multi-unit dwellings
shelter to families, while important, are failing to provide permanent
13
in areas of the town served by sewer and water. 
housing in an affordable and sustainable way.

Figure 2: Students Under 9 Eligible for McKinney-Vento
Children and families meeting the McKinney-Vento definition of
19
1 
Homelessness Assistance
homelessness 
are entitled to a number of services, resources,
18 
and supports from their Local Education Agency. 
As can be seen in
457
400
Figure 2, there has been an increase of Vermont children under 9
enrolled in school who meet the McKinney-Vento definition of
398
homelessness, from 337 in the 2018–2019 school year to 457 in
300
337
19
the 2022–2023 school year. 
268
200
247
Similarly, the Vermont Housing Coalition to End Homelessness’
226
2023 point-in-time count of those experiencing homelessness
100
shows the number of people in households with children under
18 increased by 85% from pre-pandemic levels, from 629 in 2019
0
20
to 1,166 in 2023. 
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Vermont supports homeless children and families through various
For families with access to stable housing, the costs can
programs and resources, one of which is the Family Supportive
be significant, with typical housing expenses above $15,000 per
Housing program (FSH) through the Vermont Department for
9 
year for two working adults with two children. 
Of all households
Children and Families (DCF). FSH “provides intensive case
in Vermont, 47% of Vermont households who rent and 29.8%
management and service coordination to homeless families with
of households who own report paying more than 30% of their
children, following evidence-based practice for housing families
income toward rent or a mortgage, more than what is commonly
with complex needs and multiple systems involvement.” In 2023,
14 
agreed to be affordable.
In addition, Vermont’s rental vacancy of
FSH served 344 families with 650 children, compared to 368
15 
21
3.5% in 2022 was the third-lowest in the country, 
and finding any
families with 693 children in 2022. 
rental—let alone an affordable, desirable rental—can be extremely
challenging for families.
Vermont uses a Local Coordinated Entry Partnership model to ensure
“people experiencing a housing crisis have fair and equal access
Homeownership provides a path to building financial assets for
and are quickly identified, assessed for, referred and connected to
22 
families and gives children a secure, stable housing situation,
housing assistance based on their strengths and needs” 
as
15 
but given the low homeowner vacancy rate of 1% 
in 2022,
required by The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
paired with soaring interest rates, many Vermont families are
Coordinated Entry in Vermont is used for people of all ages entering

| 
2023 Year in Review 11
BASIC NEEDS

23 
and receiving services. Between January and October 2023,  on an annual basis, the Reach Up benefit level must stay within
there were 1,402 children under the age of 12 in the Coordinated  the yearly budget appropriation approved by the legislature.
24
Entry system, 19% of all clients in Vermont. Unless that appropriation is increased, the Department cannot
increase the Reach Up benefit level. Since 2021, the maximum
benefit for a family of four has been $1,000 per month, an increase
Emergency housing policies have been in flux since the onset of
from $867 in FY2019 and FY2020, before which the maximum
the COVID-19 pandemic as public health guidance has changed,
30
benefit was $795.
funding sources have shifted, and the needs of Vermonters
have evolved. The Vermont Emergency Rental Assistance Program,
Vermont’s pandemic housing assistance, was reduced in early
Child Hunger and Nutrition Security
2023 and ended on June 30, 2023. Vermont’s General Assistance
Children who live with food insecurity may struggle to pay attention
Emergency Housing (GA) program continues to serve
and be successful in learning environments and may face
eligible households, and as of October 2, 2023, there were
immediate and long-term risks to their physical and mental health.
201 families with children and 12 pregnant people eligible for
Food insecurity is defined as the limited or uncertain availability of
25 
the traditional GA program.
In addition, low-income Vermonters
nutritionally adequate and safe foods, or limited or uncertain ability
may be eligible for Section 8 Assistance vouchers from the U.S.
31
to acquire acceptable foods in socially acceptable ways.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and
administered by Public Housing Authorities (PHAs). The Burlington
In 2022, 14.6% of children in the Northeast Census Region lived
Housing Authority, one of Vermont’s PHAs, estimates wait times
32 
in households with food insecurity,
up 46% from 10% in 2021,
for this program to be five years due to the shortage of available
33 
when pandemic era benefits and tax credits were in place.
Across
26 
units and the eligible population. 
In July 2023 there were 7,448
the country, 8.7% of children living in households with incomes
27
HUD housing choice vouchers in use in Vermont. 
above 185% of FPL are food-insecure, yet they are likely ineligible
32 
for federal nutrition programs like 3SquaresVT.
Typical annual
Reach Up
food expenses for a family of two adults and two children in 2023
Reach Up, Vermont’s Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
were estimated to be $13,429; this represents 25% of the household
9
(TANF) program, is tasked with providing foundational support to
income of two adults working for minimum wage.
help families meet basic needs, such as housing and transportation,
Several programs are supported by both federal and Vermont
along with coaching and support to overcome obstacles and reach
funding streams to address child hunger and nutrition security:
their goals. Reach Up has shifted their case management model
universal school meals, the Child and Adult Care Food Program
to a coaching framework and is now working more holistically
(CACFP), 3SquaresVT, and Women, Infants, and Children (WIC).
with the whole family. By 2024, the program will fully implement a
“Universal Engagement” model, which uses coaching and family-
Universal School Meals: Breakfast and lunch provided to students
directed planning. Universal Engagement is designed to enable
during the school day can mitigate food insecurity. Meals have been
families to pursue both short- and longer-term goals such as
provided free to all students since March 2020 and will continue with
educational attainment, stable housing, and employment in
the passage of Act 64, the “Universal School Meals bill,” in 2023.
the way that allows them to be most successful given their
individual circumstances. In fiscal year 2022, an average of 3,428
While all meals are now free for Vermont students, federal funding
families with 6,139 children received Reach Up services
contributions continue to be determined by income eligibility for
28
each month, and 38% (2,343) of those children were under age 6.
free (130% of FPL) and reduced price (185% of FPL) lunch. In the
While caseloads have risen since fiscal year 2021, the average
2022–2023 school year, 34.85% of children were eligible for free
29
34             35
number of families has not risen above 4,000 since FY2017.
and reduced lunch (FRL)
, down from 37.4%, at least partially due
to fewer families submitting applications.
Unlike some other benefit programs that are automatically adjusted

| 
12 The State of Vermont's Children
WIC served an average of approximately 11,000 participants
Beginning in October 2023, the threshold for schools to participate in
43 
during FY23.
the Community Eligibility Provision (CEP) decreased, allowing more
Of those accessing WIC, fruit and vegetable
36 
schools to participate in the program.
benefits redemption is one of the highest redeemed WIC
In addition, beginning in the
44 
food categories, at around 70% redemption.
2023-2024 school year, Vermont joined a Federal Demonstration
As of October 2023,
Project to directly certify students for free or reduced price meals
monthly fruit and vegetable benefits allocated monthly were
37 
through their enrollment in Medicaid (DC-M).
$25 per child, $44 for pregnant and postpartum individuals,
This more accurate
and $49 for breastfeeding participants, well above the pre-pandemic
way of identifying students is expected to substantially increase the
45
monthly benefit amounts of $9 per child and $11 per adult.
number of FRL eligible students. Starting this year, more eligible
students will have their meals covered by federal funds, with
Transportation
reduced administrative burden for families and schools because
The typical transportation expense for a two-adult, two-child
of Medicaid Direct Certification and a lower threshold for the
Community Eligibility Provision.
household in Vermont is $11,821, 22% of the household
9 
income of two adults working for minimum wage. Many of
Child and Adult Care Food Program: Early care and education
these dollars will be spent on fuel. Vermonters statistically
programs are eligible to participate in the Child and Adult Care
travel more miles per capita than residents of many other
Food Program (CACFP), which reimburses them for healthy food
states, coming in at 11,772 vehicle miles traveled in 2019,
46 
and snacks provided to enrolled children. As of October 2023, 42%
which was 13th-highest of all states in that year. 
In 2019,
(313) of center-based and family child care homes participated
63% of Vermont children under 6 living in households with
38,39 
in CACFP.
(This number does not include afterschool or
incomes below the FPL live in rural areas where having a
school-based programs.) A 2022 study highlighted four barriers to
vehicle is critical to access basic goods and services, as well
participation: cost, paperwork, staffing shortages, and the time it
47 
as to get to work and school. Many Vermont children rely on
takes to procure, prepare, and serve food and administer
district-provided busing for transportation to and from school.
40 
the program.
Many programs provide food without participating
Between September 1 and October 31, 2023, there were an
in CACFP.
average of 44 bus driver vacancies posted daily for the 128
48
Vermont school districts. 
3SquaresVT: In July 2023, 3SquaresVT, Vermont’s Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), served 20,860 children
Connectivity
41 
under age 18.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Vermont issued
Another long-standing challenge for Vermonters is digital connectivity.
emergency allotments to eligible households, effectively ensuring
that every household receiving 3SquaresVT was receiving the
While a lack of high-speed internet was previously a hardship,
maximum benefit allowed. The federal 2023 Consolidated
connectivity is now an absolute necessity. According to the Vermont
Appropriations Act ended the emergency allotments in March 2023.
Department of Public Service, based on data from Vermont internet
Average monthly benefits decreased 22% from $277 in December
service providers, 81.4% of building locations in Vermont are
42
2022–February 2023 to $217 in March 2023–May 2023.
served with speeds of at least 25/3 (25 Mbps download and 3
Mbps upload), while only 34.5% have access to 100/100, up from
WIC: Participation in the Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)
49 
For context, 25/3 is only fast enough for one virtual
29.2% in 2021. 
program has declined slightly since September 2022. Like many
programs, COVID-era program accommodations allowing for virtual
meeting with video if there are no other devices running.
visits have recently ended with a return to a required annual in-
Broadband access across the state varies and is largely aligned
person appointment, which is new to many families who joined WIC
with population density, with higher-density areas having higher
during the COVID-19 public health emergency. WIC is monitoring the
levels of access. Vermont has received $229 million in federal
impact this operational change has on overall participation.
dollars through the Broadband Equity, Access, and Deployment
(BEAD) Program which will prioritize unserved, underserved,
50
and community anchor institutions. 
20,860 Vermont children under
Recommendations from Vermont’s Early Childhood State Advisory
18 were served by 3SquaresVT,
Council Network specific to access to basic needs can be found
Vermont’s Supplemental Nutrition
beginning on page 4.
Assistance Program (SNAP) in
41
July 2023. 

| 
2023 Year in Review 13
CHALLENGING CHILDHOOD EXPERIENCES

CHALLENGING CHILDHOOD EXPERIENCES

VECAP GOAL 1 :
All Children Have
a Healthy Start

Toxic Stress and Trauma              The Impact of Positive Experiences
Living in strong families within supportive communities provides
Despite adversity, positive childhood experiences appear to have long-
the foundation for long-term child health and well-being and the
lasting effects. The single most common factor for children who
ability to overcome adversity. Children who experience adverse
develop resilience is having at least one stable and committed
4
childhood events like those listed in this chapter may have a
relationship with a supportive parent, caregiver, or other adult.
traumatic reaction with impacts on their functioning across
settings and over time. The systems that support children who
Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE)
experience trauma in response to these experiences are critical.
The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) score has become one
Our support of such systems must be balanced with support for
of the most common indicators used to measure exposure to
prevention programs to build flourishing communities in which
toxic stress and childhood adversity. Research has shown that
children can thrive.
ACEs can negatively impact health and well-being across the
5 
lifespan 
if not buffered by nurturing and supportive relationships.
Figure 3: Adverse Childhood Experiences for Children
In Vermont, 22.8% of children under age 18 have had two or more
5
6 
Under 18 
adverse childhood experiences 
(see Figure 3). The four most
common ACEs for Vermont children under 18 are: experiencing the
7 
divorce of a parent or guardian (26.2%) 
, living with someone with
18.6%
substance use disorder (14.2%), living with someone who has a
Two
serious mental health challenge (13%), and living in a home where
15.6%
it is hard to cover basic needs (12.6%). Of note, this measure fails
65.8%
to account for factors that mitigate or exacerbate toxic stress,
None
which are important factors in how trauma or adversity
is experienced. Vermont encourages the use of standardized tools
One
for screening and assessment. Knowledge of ACEs as part of being
trauma-responsive is encouraged within the broader context of a
strength-based, person-centered, and culturally responsive approach.
Trauma-Informed and Trauma-Responsive Policy
Core principles of trauma-informed and trauma-responsive
Domestic Violence
care include: safety, trustworthiness and transparency,
Children in Vermont are not always physically or emotionally safe in
collaboration and peer support, empowerment, choice, and the
their home environments. Nationally, 1 in 15 children are exposed to
1 
8 
intersectionality of identity characteristics. 
In 2018, Vermont
intimate partner violence each year,
and 1 in 5 children will be exposed
9 
enacted these principles in state statute and created the position
in their lifetime.
In 2023, 1,537 Vermont children and youth connected
of Director of Trauma Prevention and Resilience Development
with one of the 15 member organizations of the Vermont Network
to implement a public health approach across the full Agency
Against Domestic and Sexual Violence for help related to abuse toward
of Human Services to become a trauma-informed system of
a family member or toward themselves. These organizations also
2 
10
care.
By investing in systems and community-based solutions,
supported 168 children impacted by child sexual abuse. 
communities mitigate the impact of trauma, reduce the potential
for re-traumatization, and improve overall community health,
Additionally, these member organizations supported housing for
thus also building resilience, connections, and capacity for
those children likely impacted by domestic violence. Shelters housed
facing future potential experiences of trauma and adversity.
239 children (136 of whom were under age 7), motels and safe
Preventive approaches are less expensive and more effective
homes sheltered 224 children (123 under age 7), and transitional
3
11
than addressing harm that has already occurred. 
housing sheltered 26 children in 2023.

| 
14 The State of Vermont's Children
Figure 5: Vermont Licensed Foster Homes and Children
Child Welfare
10
in Custody 2018 to 2023
When a child’s safety and or well-being is threatened, the Department
for Children and Families-Family Services Division (DCF-FSD)
1429
1427 
often becomes involved. Calls to the child protection hotline in
1329 
1500
1203
10
2023 resulted in 2,027 assessments and 2,380 investigations. 
1087 
985
The result of these interventions may include ongoing DCF-Family
1301 
1250 
1239
1000
Services involvement in one of the following types of cases:
1057
990
DCF out-of-home protective custody where a child is placed with
834
a relative or foster family, conditional custody where the child is
500
in the custody of a parent, relative, or fictive kin with DCF-Family
Licensed Foster Homes Children in Custody
Services supervision and services to ensure the child’s safety,
0
or family support where DCF-Family Services provides support
2018 2019 2020 
2021 2022 2023
to families without court involvement. In 2023, there were 985
children in out-of-home protective custody, 467 children in
10
To address these gaps, there continues to be Diligent Recruitment
conditional custody, and 150 family support cases. 
efforts in DCF-FSD to recruit, train, and retain foster parents.
This includes but is not limited to, adjusting training and
10
Figure 4: Children Under 9 in DCF Protective Custody by Age
training requirements, adjusting regulations for kinship providers,
and targeted recruitment of foster parents.
Total under 9
0 to 2 3 to 5 6 to 8

800
Families Come First: The Department for Children and Families-
721
659
Family Services Division is committed to preventive approaches.
695
657
618
The five-year Title IV-E Prevention Plan under the federal Families
198
541
541
First Prevention Services Act includes the implementation of two
520
509 
600
178
174
172
evidence-based prevention services: Parent Child Interaction
170
14
152
474
129
Therapy (PCIT) and Motivational Interviewing.
240
146
117
251
235
228
200
127
400
181
Updating the Child Welfare Information System
175
154
152
Vermont’s child welfare information system, used by DCF-FSD, was
174
283
built in 1983 and is one of the oldest in the country. The national
270
257
248
246
200
standard for child welfare information systems, implemented in
238
237
223
208
45 states and territories, is the Comprehensive Child Welfare
173
Information System (CCWIS). Family Services Workers who are
2021   2023
2019 
2015   2017
already managing large caseloads with complex situations and
dynamics have a heavy administrative burden because of the lack of
a CCWIS. This takes time away from the actual case management
The number of children under age 9 in protective custody on
needs of particularly vulnerable children and families. A modern
13 
September 30, 2023, was 474 out of 985 children under 18.
As can
CCWIS would enable Vermont’s DCF-FSD to move away from
be seen in Figure 4, there appears to be a downward trend in the
paper files, reduce administrative burden for frontline workers,
number of children under 9 in DCF custody after an elevated number
and expand data reporting to enable Vermont to track programmatic
of children between 2015 and 2019.
interventions and fully draw down federal funding for the child
welfare system. The current system is preventing Vermont from
Placement for Children in Custody
accessing all federally available dollars and is resulting in increased
There are different placement options for children in DCF custody
15
federal financial penalties annually.
depending on their individual strengths and needs along with
the available placement options. In 2023, 8% of children under
In October 2023, Vermont’s Early Childhood State Advisory
9 were living in an adoptive home in which the adoption was
Council Network endorsed a policy recommendation to “secure
not yet finalized, 43% were placed in a licensed foster home,
sufficient state funding to fully implement the Comprehensive
42% were placed with a relative, 6% were placed with a parent
Child Welfare Information System (CCWIS).” See page 4 for the
for trial reunification, and 2% were placed in a group or
full slate of 2024 Policy Recommendations.
institutional setting. As seen in Figure 5, the number of licensed
foster homes (including kinship care) has declined since 2020 and
fallen below the number of children in custody for the past two years,
with 834 foster homes for 985 children in custody in 2023.

| 
2023 Year in Review 15
HEALTH & WELL-BEING

HEALTH & WELL-BEING

VECAP GOAL 1 :
All Children Have a Healthy Start

Vermont Medicaid provides comprehensive health insurance
Social Determinants of Health
for the children of Vermont through the Dr. Dynasaur program.
“The social determinants of health (SDOH) are the non-medical
Vermont has some of the most generous Medicaid income
factors that influence health outcomes. They are the conditions
limits for children under 18, with eligibility for children set at
in which people are born, grow, work, live, and age, and the wider
6
312% of the Federal Poverty Level. 
set of forces and systems shaping the conditions of daily life.
These forces and systems include economic policies and systems,
development agendas, social norms, social policies and
Medicaid coverage for qualified birthing Vermonters during
1 
Vermont’s holistic approach to early childhood
political systems.”
pregnancy provides health care access for prevention and
well-being recognizes that we all have a role to play in ensuring
intervention. The coverage period was permanently extended
the health of our children by improving these social factors.
from 60 days postpartum to 12 months in 2023. In 2022,
7
While the indicators below are only focused on physical and
38% of births in Vermont were funded by Medicaid. 
mental health access and utilization, additional SDOH can be
found throughout this report, including in the Demographics
Figure 6: Vermont Children Under 18 Insurance
2
section on page 9 and the Basic Needs section on page 10.
Coverage 2022
Other
Employer-Sponsored
Perinatal Health
Uninsured
The perinatal period, from pregnancy through one year after birth,
3.2%
is a key time for a child’s long-term development and the well-being
Non-Group
4.2%
of the birthing parent, child, and family system. More information
Insurance
on the perinatal period specific to mental health and substance
use can be found on page 20.

Health Insurance
50.3%
Insurance Coverage: In 2022, 97% percent of Vermont children
41%
2 
Of families
under age 18 had some type of health insurance. 
with children under 6, 78% reported that insurance for their
3 
This is down 4.9% from 2019,
children was adequate in 2021. 
primarily due to a decrease in the ability of children to see
3 
Medicaid
In Vermont, 50.3% of children
the health care providers they need.
under 18 are covered by employer-sponsored insurance, 41% are
covered by Medicaid (primary or secondary coverage), 4.2% are
2
covered by non-group insurance, and 3.2% are uninsured.
Medicaid Redetermination and “Unwinding”: Each year,
Vermonters receiving Medicaid, including children, go through
There have been multiple initiatives to increase health insurance
a redetermination process to ensure they are still eligible.
enrollment among children. Beginning in January 2024,
This process was suspended from March 2020 to March 2023
Vermont will implement 12 months of continuous Medicaid
due to funding changes brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic.
eligibility for children so that they are not at risk of losing
4 
The Immigrant
coverage outside of their annual redetermination. 
During this pause, enrollment of children receiving Medicaid
Health Insurance Program began in July 2022 and provides
in Vermont rose by 8.6%, from 62,363 in March 2020 to
8
coverage for pregnant individuals and children under age 19
67,705 in March 2023. 
who have an immigration status for which Vermont Medicaid
5 
Of note,
is not available (except for Emergency Medicaid). 
The federal government required states to restart this
this coverage does not extend to home- and community-based
redetermination process in 2023, and “Medicaid Unwinding”
services such as home visiting and Children’s Integrated Services.
began in Vermont in April and is expected to last more than one year.

| 
16 The State of Vermont's Children
with VCHIP and the American Association of Pediatrics
Vermont has taken steps to support enrollees through this process,
Vermont Chapter, is closely monitoring the impact of COVID-19
including increased outreach, suspension of premiums,
pandemic on immunization rates.
and enhanced automatic renewals. However, there has been and
will be an inevitable reduction in enrollment through this process.
In September 2023, there were approximately 63,400 children
Blood Lead Level Screening: Protecting children from exposure to
9 
enrolled in Dr. Dynasaur
lead is important for lifelong good health. No safe blood lead level
compared to 67,396 in September 2022,
8 
in children has been identified. Even low levels of lead in blood have
a 5.9% decrease. 
Medicaid for adults is available for eligible
been shown to affect a child’s learning, ability to pay attention, and
individuals after they age out of Dr. Dynasaur. In Vermont,
13 
academic achievement.
and across the country, the impact of Medicaid redeterminations
The state of Vermont requires primary
14 
for children will become clearer as the process is completed
health care providers to test for lead at ages 1 and 2, 
and the
and additional data become available.
Healthy Homes Lead Poisoning Prevention Program at the Vermont
Department of Health (VDH) has updated its guidelines to include
monitoring for children with any detectable level of lead, down from
Preventive Care
3.5μg/dl. VDH has identified detectable blood lead levels as a
Well-Care Visits: Vermont emphasizes well-care visits, routine
key indicator for the Healthy Vermonters 2030 goals. In 2022,
healthcare visits held when the child is healthy, which allow
the provider and parent to focus on prevention, track growth
and development, address any concerns, and build a strong
and trusting relationship. In 2021, 89.6% of children under 6
72.5% of 1-year-old
and 85.2% of children 6 to 11 had one or more preventive
3 
children in Vermont
care visits with a health care professional. 
Vermont is
also committed to oral health and preventive dental care. In
were screened for
2021 60% of children ages 1 to 5 and 93% of children from
lead in 2022.
3
6 to 11 years of age had a preventative dental care visit. 

Immunizations: Receiving the full series of recommended
immunizations shields children against 14 preventable diseases.
Vaccinations also help protect vulnerable people from the
risk of disease, especially infants who are too young to
72.5% of 1-year-olds and 64.1% of 2-year-olds were screened.
be vaccinated, and children and adults whose immune systems
Of those screened, 81.2% of 1-year-olds and 82.7% of 2-year-olds
10 
are weaker. 
In 2022, 76% of Vermont children received their
had blood lead levels that were undetectable at the time of
11 
15 
recommended immunizations by age 2, 
compared to 70%
their annual screening.
Although screening rates are increasing,
12 
in the total United States. 
However, rates differed by county,
they are still lower than pre-pandemic rates as a result of a test
from a high of 82% in Rutland County to a low of 60% in
kit recall in 2021 and an absence of in-person WIC clinics.
11 
15
Essex County.
The Vermont Department of Health, in partnership
Both barriers have been addressed and corrected.

Policy recommendations on physical and mental health and well-being from Vermont’s Early Childhood State Advisory Network can be found
on page 6.

Data on perinatal health and well-being can be found in the Data Spotlight starting on page 20.

Data on child development, including developmental screenings, early intervention, and Autism Spectrum Disorder, can be found in the Child
Development and Education section starting on page 24.
| 
2023 Year in Review 17
HEALTH & WELL-BEING

MENTAL HEALTH FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES

For children and families, mental health refers to social, emotional, and behavioral well-being, and includes the capacity to
regulate and express emotion; form close, secure relationships; and explore and learn from the environment. Healthy social
and emotional development and access to services, resources, and supports allow children to develop the resilience to ensure that
stress is tolerable rather than toxic and to grow into well-rounded, healthy adults. Toxic stress without such supports can have
lifelong impacts on the ability to develop peer relationships, learn, and thrive.

Mental Health Services for Children in Vermont
Vermont’s mental health system has multiple levels of services to support children and families with behavioral, emotional, and mental
health conditions, from outpatient services to residential treatment.

Community-Based
Crisis Case Management
Residential Treatement
Outpatient Services
Inpatient Care 
Services & Supports
& Placements 

the lowest since 2012 despite the increased need for mental health
Children with Behavioral, Emotional, and Mental
17 
services noted above. 
DAs also provide crisis services for those
Health Conditions
children needing immediate care. In 2023, there were 232 children
There is ample evidence of the rise in numbers of children
under age 9 who received crisis services, with a five-year average
requiring services and the increased acuity of those needs. Even
17 
of 237. 
Of note, these indicators do not capture the current
before the COVID-19 pandemic, rates of children with behavioral,
need for either service, only utilization of services.
emotional, and mental health conditions were rising. As can
be seen in Figure 7, between 2017 and 2021, the rate of
Mental Health Workforce
children with diagnosis of ADHD, anxiety, depression and/
As is the case with the majority of human services sectors,
or a behavioral or conduct condition in Vermont rose from
the turnover and vacancy rates for the mental health workforce
8.8% to 16% for children ages 3 to 8. During this same period,
16
are directly impacting access to and utilization of services.
overall U.S. rates remained stable between 9.8% and 10.5%. 
The total number of positions at DAs and Specialized Service
Agencies (SSAs) varies based on grant funding and special projects.
Figure 7: Children with ADHD, Anxiety, Depression, and/or
1
Like many sectors, Vermont’s DAs and SSAs have high turnover
Behavior or Conduct Condition, Vermont and U.S.
and vacancy rates. In 2023, the average turnover rate for mental
health program staff at DAs and SSAs was 23.3% and the average
Vermont   US
vacancy rate for mental health and substance use programs
17
was 18%, with rates by agency ranging from 10.0% to 24.6%. 
16.1%
12.6%
Figure 8: Children Under 9 Served by Designated Mental
2
10.5%
Health Agencies 2017 - 2023 
9.9%
9.8%
8.8% 
4,000

2016-2017     2018-2019     2020-2021
3,000

Service Utilization
2,000
Routine mental health services provided by Vermont’s 10
3,322
3,322
3,138
3,171
Designated Mental Health Agencies (DAs) are a primary
2,967
2,910
1,000
2,525
intervention strategy for reducing the potential later use of
higher-acuity services. As depicted in Figure 8, the number of
0
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
children under age 9 served by DAs over the past seven years
has ranged from a high of 3,322 in 2021 to a low of 2,525 in 2023,

| 
| 
18 The State of Vermont's Children
18 
The State of Vermont's Children
Two other programs had to move children/youth temporarily.
Residential Treatment
Still others had temporary staff shortages as employees dealt
For some children, community-based supports may not be
18
with flooding in their own homes and communities. 
adequate to effectively address the clinical needs of the child
and family. In these instances, the family and support team may
Boarding in Emergency Departments
consider out-of-home treatment such as a community-based
As noted above, there are not enough inpatient or residential
therapeutic foster home, small group home, or residential
treatment beds for Vermont children in need of this resource.
treatment program. However, Vermont currently has the lowest
18
In Vermont, and across the country, children are held in
number of out-of-home treatment beds in over two decades. 
emergency departments while awaiting a placement to keep
Staffing shortages are a primary cause for this drop in residential
them safe and provide critical care. According to data from
capacity and are a problem across the country. The issue may
the Vermont Association of Hospitals and Health Systems,
be compounded by the increased acuity in children’s and youth’s
in 2020, there were over 1,100 discharges from emergency
behaviors and their struggle to access step-down programs.
departments (EDs) for children with a primary mental health
In addition to full program closures, some programs have
diagnosis, with 18% of those children waiting two or more
had to temporarily close beds or shift from seven to five days
19 
days for placement. 
Though the average number of children
of operations per week. These closures, bed reductions, and
under 18 waiting in EDs for mental health placement has
reduced days have been compounded by fiscal concerns
decreased from a daily average of 15 in January 2022 to 7
specific to the funding methodology that has existed for
in October 2023, 71% of those children boarded in EDs for
Private Non-Medical Institutions (PNMI). In recognition of
19 
more than 24 hours. 
Boarding of individuals waiting for a
these challenges, the State of Vermont has begun a multiphase
mental health placement decreases the capacity of ED beds.
approach to update the rate-setting rules and payment
In October 2023, an average of 14% of ED beds on any given
methodology. Draft rules have been proposed, but approval
19
day were used for mental health boarding. 
is partially dependent on the funding necessary to implement
the rule changes. In June 2023, there were 256 children ages
21 and younger in licensed residential treatment programs,
an increase of 27 children from 2021. Of these children,
Many of the residential programs
17
34 children (13.3%) were under the age of 9. 
in Vermont were impacted by the
July flooding.
Impacts of the July flooding: Since the June reporting was
completed, many of the residential programs in Vermont were
impacted by the July flooding. Two programs in Vermont
experienced infrastructure impacts due the flooding in July—
one had to close a building for repairs, and the second had to
decrease bed capacity due to damage in a basement apartment.

FEDERAL POLICY CONSIDERATION
Two critical federal resources that build Vermont’s capacity to meet mental health needs cannot be used
for prevention and promotion of mental health activities: Medicaid and the Mental Health Block Grant.
Medicaid requires a diagnosis for services and the Mental Health Block Grant can only be used for adults
with Severe Mental Illness and youth with Severe Emotional Disturbance. As children and families are
facing new and compounded challenges from the ripple effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, funding for
upstream prevention and promotion services is essential to Vermont’s ability to turn the curve on wellness.

| 
| 
2023 Year in Review 19
2023 Year in Review 19
DATA SPOTLIGHT:
PERINATAL HEALTH
AND WELL-BEING

those in the perinatal period, their families, and their communities.
The foundation of child and family health and well-being starts
before birth. The perinatal period, from pregnancy through one
These include negative obstetric and non-obstetric physical health
year after birth, is a key time for a child’s long-term development
outcomes for both the birthing parent and child, productivity loss,
and the well-being of the birthing parent, child, and family system.
and increased spending on social services resulting in an estimated
1
This period is a critical opportunity for providing access to
cost of $36,000 per birthing parent and their child in Vermont. 
concrete supports when interventions are particularly impactful.
This chapter includes data and context on the current landscape
More information is needed about the prevalence of PMADs in non-
and challenges as well as an overview of several long-standing
birthing partners and adoptive parents. For non-birthing partners,
and innovative opportunities for intervention, several of which
a recent meta-analysis showed a global prevalence of 7.3% for paternal
are contained in the 2024 Policy Recommendations of Vermont’s
prenatal and postpartum depression and 10.7% for paternal prenatal
3 
Early Childhood State Advisory Council. (See page 4 for the full
and postpartum anxiety.
PMAD screening for non-birthing and
slate of 2024 Policy Recommendations.)
adoptive parents is inconsistent, as PMADs were historically thought to
be linked to physiological changes only impacting the birthing parent.
Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders (PMADs)
Perinatal mood and anxiety disorders (PMADs) are mental health  Perinatal Substance Use
conditions that develop at any time during pregnancy or after having
Substance use during the perinatal period can have lifelong effects
a baby, through the year after delivery, adopting, or experiencing
on a child’s ability to thrive. Vermont PRAMS (Pregnancy Risk
pregnancy or infant loss. Vermont has prioritized the screening,
Assessment Monitoring System) is an ongoing self-reporting
referral, treatment, training, support for families, and public
survey of Vermont parents who recently gave birth. The most
awareness of PMADs for many years. PMADs affected more than
recent Vermont PRAMS data from 2021 births reported by the
25% of pregnant and postpartum people in Vermont in the 2018 to
Vermont Department of Health (VDH) shows a moderate decrease
1                                   2
4
2020 birth cohort
, compared with a national prevalence of 11.5%.
in substance use among perinatal people. 
This may be in part due to increased public awareness, training,
referrals, and higher screening rates, with 90% of pregnant people in
Substance Use During Pregnancy: Opioid use in Vermont continues
Vermont screened for PMADs compared with 79% for the country
to occupy the headlines, with a “third wave” of the opioid epidemic
1 
as a whole.
PMADs are highly detectable and treatable, but when
arriving with inexpensive and potent fentanyl. In 2021, Vermont’s rate
left untreated, PMADs have substantial impacts on the lives of
of infants born with a diagnosis of drug withdrawal syndrome
5 
was 13.6 per 1,000 live births.
However, the Vermont rate is down
from 24 per 1,000 live births in 2018 and significantly decreased
5
from a peak of 35.7 per 1,000 live births in 2014. 
25% of pregnant and postpartum
Opioids are not the only substances used during pregnancy.
people in Vermont in the 2018 to 2020
As can be seen in Figure 9, non-exclusive categories show the
birth cohort were affected by PMADS,
use of alcohol, cigarettes, and other substances ranging from
1
compared with 11.5% nationally. 
10.7% to 11.8% for children born in 2021, meaning that one or more
4
substances were used during more than 1 in 10 pregnancies. 

| 
20 The State of Vermont's Children
Perinatal Mortality and Substance Use Disorder (SUD): Since 2012,
Vermont has had an average of two to three perinatal deaths
of perinatal deaths reviewed
per year from any cause (from pregnancy through the first year
were directly related to
postpartum for the birthing individual). In 2022, Vermont saw a
7
100% 
substance use disorder. 
sharp increase in overall number of maternal deaths with a total
6
of six deaths. 

Opportunities for Intervention and Health Promotion
9
Figure 9: Substance Use During Pregnancy (2021 Births)
Strategies
There are numerous long-standing and innovative approaches to
supporting birthing parents, children, and family systems during
the perinatal period. It is well known that prevention is more
11.8%
11.0% 
10.7% 
effective and less expensive than treatment, and the perinatal
period is a key time for intervention. A partnership between the
Vermont Child Health Improvement Project and the Family
and Child Health Division at the Vermont Department
of Health, the Perinatal Quality Collaborative Vermont (PQC-VT),
mobilizes state networks to implement quality improvement
efforts and improve care for perinatal people. The mission of the
Alcohol
Cigarette     Other
PQC-VT is to optimize health access, treatment, and outcomes in
Smoking    Substance
the perinatal period and infancy through collaboration and
continuous quality improvement. There are many additional
regionally run initiatives to support birthing families, many of
which are collaborations among providers, community partners,
In 2023, the Vermont Maternal Mortality Review Panel (MMRP)
perinatal health organizations, and other organizations focused
reviewed seven perinatal deaths occurring between 2021
on well-being.
and 2023. All the deaths reviewed for this time period were
either from accidental overdose or from infection resulting
Prenatal and Postpartum Visits: Prenatal and postpartum care
from intravenous drug use. Most of the accidental overdose
is an essential tool for supporting healthy pregnancies and long-
deaths involved polysubstance use. In addition, all deaths
8
term outcomes. Of the 5,379 Vermont babies born in 2021, 
reviewed occurred in the postpartum period and in the home
or in the community. The MMRP has identified the period from
86.7% of birthing parents had adequate prenatal care (early entry
3 to 12 months postpartum as particularly vulnerable for
and regular visits), and 94.4% had a postpartum visit.
perinatal people. In their 2024 legislative report, the MMRP
Of birthing parents, 79.6% had a visit with a health care provider in
4 
issued multiple recommendations for the state, many of
the year before pregnancy.
Of births in 2021, 72% of pregnancies
which were related to improvements to screening, support,
were intended, surpassing the Healthy Vermonters 2030 goal
7                         4
and care coordination for those with SUD. 
of 65%.

| 
2023 Year in Review 21
SPOTLIGHT: PERINATAL HEALTH

9
two days of age (9.5% vs. 19.2%) among infants born in 2019. 
Care and Feeding of Infants: Families make the best choice
for their unique situation with recommendations from their
Screening and Psychiatric Consultation for Perinatal Mood and
health care providers about the feeding of their infants.
Anxiety Disorders: When an individual is diagnosed with a PMAD,
Breastfeeding and chestfeeding may not be available or may not
clinicians in Vermont have the opportunity to consult with the
be the right choice for all families for a multitude of reasons.
Perinatal Psychiatric Consultation Service about medication
For those who are able, breastfeeding/chestfeeding is associated
treatment plans, therapeutic needs, and appropriate referrals.
with preventing obesity and diabetes in children, and puts birthing
The Perinatal Psychiatric Consultation Service also provides training
parents at lower risk for breast and ovarian cancer, diabetes,
and technical assistance to medical and mental health providers.
hypertension, and cardiovascular disease. Across the board,
Financial cost savings from this program are estimated at
when compared to the whole U.S., Vermont has higher rates of
$200,000 per year at current staffing and $650,000 per year with
expanded capacity and coordination. In addition, it is estimated
that 47% of individuals who receive this support will achieve
Figure 10: Breastfeeding/Chestfeeding Rates for
10
9
remission from a PMAD. 
2019 Births, Vermont and U.S.

Developmental Understanding and Legal Collaboration for
Vermont
US
Everyone (DULCE): DULCE is implemented in pediatric practices
91.8% 
and proactively addresses social determinants of health,
83.2%
promotes the healthy development of infants, and provides
support to their parents during the first six months of life.
DULCE programs are currently offered at six sites across Vermont
54%
11
and served 350 babies between January and October of 2023. 
Three new sites will launch in 2024 serving Burlington, St. Albans
35.9%
36.2% 
12 
and St. Johnsbury. 
DULCE embeds into the pediatric care
24.9%
team a Family Specialist, employed by the region’s Parent Child
Initiation Exclusivity at
Sustained at
Center (PCC), who attends well-child visits with families and providers.
6 Months 
12 Months
Trained in child development and relational practice, the Family
Specialist connects families to the concrete supports and resources
breastfeeding/chestfeeding initiation (91.8% vs. 83.2%), exclusive
they need. DULCE implementation includes collaboration among
breastfeeding/chestfeeding through 6 months (36.2% vs. 24.9%),
the medical practice, the PCC as the early childhood sector lead,
and sustained breastfeeding/chestfeeding through 12 months
and a legal partner to universally support families by addressing
(54% vs. 35.9%); and lower rates of infants receiving formula before
the accumulated burden of social and economic hardship.

HIGH-QUALITY AND INCLUSIVE PHYSICAL AND
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES (VECAP GOAL 3)

Invest in Perinatal Supports
• Invest in statewide strategies that center early relational health to ensure families are supported across clinical and community
settings during the critical perinatal period, including after experiencing the loss of a child or loss of a caregiver.
f Fund the expansion of Developmental Understanding and Legal Collaboration for Everyone (DULCE) approach sites.
f Invest in peer- and community-based strategies such as multiagency collaboration teams, like regional CHARM/
Community Response teams, to ensure families have the supports they need through a strength-based approach
and in recognition that Vermont’s maternal mortality incidences have a concerning overlap with substance use
disorders (SUD).
f Ensure continuity of care and high-quality services are available for the perinatal population. Expand Children’s
Integrated Services (CIS) supports past the 8-week postpartum period to the full year postpartum for the
birthing person, in alignment with postpartum Medicaid expansion.
f Pursue strategies that center equitable services and birth-related outcomes for parents/caregivers of color,
including expanding Medicaid coverage to doula services.

| 
22 The State of Vermont's Children
Home Visiting: The transition to parenthood is a time of celebration  policy through their employer and more than 90% have access
16 
as well as potential stress. Home visiting programs provide new  to unpaid family leave. 
In Vermont, 47% of birthing parents
and expectant parents with information, support, and referrals to
returning to work after having a child do not have paid leave.
community resources and services.
Birthing parents returning to work in Vermont after paid leave
Strong Families Vermont Home Visiting offers two evidence-
are more likely to have private insurance (72%), while only
based home visiting programs, the Maternal Early Childhood
26% of birthing parents with access to paid leave are
17 
Sustained Home Visiting (MECSH program and Parents as
on Medicaid. 
Access to paid family leave has been associated
Teachers (PAT)). The MECSH program just completed its fifth year
with birthing parents being more likely to be working
of implementation across the state. During program year 2022,
(18.3% higher probability) one year following birth and an
MECSH served 421 families and 393 children with a total of
average increase of $3,400 in household income among
13 18
3,175 visits. 
birthing parents of 1-year-olds. 
The PAT program is in the development phase,
with nine PAT affiliate programs across Vermont. Initial engagement
for the development year of PAT has included 21 families with
21 children served for a total of 315 visits. The program will shift
to full implementation next year with a full staff and integration
47% of birthing parents returning
13
into affiliate programs, which will increase capacity.
to work after having a child do not
18
have paid leave in Vermont. 
Home-based Early Head Start and Head Start home visiting
served 308 infants and pregnant individuals during program
14
year 2023. 

Paid Family and Medical Leave: Access to paid family and medical
leave is associated with improved physical and mental health
for new parents, decreased infant mortality, financial security
Additional physical and mental health access and utilization data
for caregivers in the short and long term, and improved
can be found beginning on page 16, and related recommendations
connections to the workforce, particularly for women, who are
can be found on page 4.
15
more likely than men to be caregivers for children and older adults.
Nationally, 27% of workers have access to a paid family leave

ACCESS TO BASIC NEEDS (VECAP GOAL 1)

Paid Family and Medical Leave Insurance
• Enact a Paid Family and Medical Leave Insurance program for Vermonters seeking to take time off to care for a
family member or themselves while welcoming a new child into the family, while navigating an illness or injury,
or after experiencing a loss. Ensure that the benefit through this program covers all caregivers in the case of a two-
parent household, and that the benefit is generous enough that loss of income is not a barrier for those looking to
utilize the program.

| 
2023 Year in Review 23
CHILD DEVELOPMENT & EDUCATION

CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND EDUCATION

connected to the services they need at an early age, when the
Vermont’s early childhood system includes many resources,
benefits are the greatest. Data from Vermont’s statewide medical
services, and supports to give children the best opportunity to
home initiative, the Blueprint for Health, shows that in 2021, 63% of
succeed throughout their lives. Starting during pregnancy and
Vermont children under age 3 had received a developmental
extending through age 8, the system meets child and family needs
5 
screening in the past 12 months. 
through creative and diverse programs. These programs can,
Of note, this indicator does
1 
at times, be difficult to navigate,
not capture all screening activities. As can be seen in Figure 11,
but Vermont continues to improve
hospital service area rates vary from 76% in Burlington to 44%
equitable access and transitions between programs and services.
5 
in Newport. 
Although the Newport Health Services Area is still
showing the lowest screening rate, there was a 120% increase
Children’s Integrated Services (CIS)
between 2020 and 2021 due to continuous quality improvement
CIS is designed to wrap around the whole family to help ensure
6
efforts implemented to address previously low screening rates. 
the healthy development and well-being of children from before
Efforts to increase the use of developmental screenings include
birth through age 5. CIS offers four core services to families of
the Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ) Online Platform hosted
young children facing challenges: Early Intervention (IDEA Part C),
by Help Me Grow Vermont. In 2022, the ASQ Online logged or
Specialized Child Care, Early Childhood and Family Mental Health,
supported 4,688 ASQ-3 and 932 ASQ:SE (social-emotional) screens.
and Strong Families Vermont Home Visiting. During FFY 2023,
As of October 2023, there were 65 programs using the
a total of 3,712 unique clients received at least one of the core
2 
ASQ Online, including 15 medical practices, 40 early childhood
services within CIS. 
Each client receiving services has a One Plan
education programs, four Children’s Integrated Services regional teams,
that includes six-month or annual goals. Goals address topics
7
and six home visitors. 
such as a child’s developmental progress, continuity of placement
in a quality early childhood education program, safe housing, and,
with adult support, use of coping strategies during difficult situations.
Figure 11: Children 3 and Under Who Received a
In 2022, 88% of CIS clients achieved one or more individualized
Developmental Screening in the Past 12 Months
3
5
plan goals by their annual review or their exit from CIS. 
by Health Service Area

Parent Child Center Network
The network of 15 Parent Child Centers (PCC) serves all of Vermont
76%
74%
with a focus on early identification, intervention, and prevention
73%
71%
68%
through eight core services: parent education, parent support,
63%
home visits, early childhood services, concrete family supports,
61%61%
57%
54%
55%
playgroups, community development, and information and referral.
50%
50%
During FY23, over 70,000 participants were served across all 15
44%
4 
PCC programs.
When surveyed, over 94% of parents receiving
supports from Parent Child Centers reported that they got the help
4
they needed and that they felt stronger and more confident as parents.

Developmental Screening
Developmental screening is a whole-population strategy designed
to help families better understand children’s early development,
BurlingtonMiddleburyRandolphSt. AlbansSpringfieldState of VermontBenningtonBattleboroBarreSt. JohnsburyMorrisvilleRutlandWhite River Jct.Newport
celebrate milestones, and identify concerns so that children get

| 
24 The State of Vermont's Children
VECAP GOAL 3 :
Access to High-Quality Early Childhood Services and Supports

6
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Table 3: Children Receiving Special Education Services 
Ensuring children and their families have high-quality and timely
developmental screenings, including behavioral/autism screening
Age    IEP 504 EST
and follow-up assessment, is a critical step in ensuring they
533
3
12
***
can access needed services. Following screening, there are currently
several potential barriers that families face when seeking follow-
641
4
28
***
up assessment and evaluation for their child, including enduring
750
5
144
42
long wait times, completing lengthy assessment paperwork,
securing transportation, and navigating language barriers.
844
6
344
104
Vermont’s pediatric and early intervention communities have
931
7
401
155
identified a need for community-based developmental and
autism assessments. Through a partnership with the Vermont
1,106
8
468
179
Child Health Improvement Program (VCHIP) at the University
4,805
Total
1,397
480
of Vermont, pediatricians are receiving training to conduct autism
assessment and diagnosis in collaboration with Children’s
Integrated Service teams. National data shows the prevalence
Early Care and Education
of autism spectrum disorders increased significantly between
Vermont’s early care and education system is considered a “mixed
8
2000 (1 in 150 children) and 2020 (1 in 36 children). 
delivery system,” meaning that it consists of a mix of programs that
serve children 6 weeks to 5 years old and not yet in kindergarten,
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)
including licensed and registered family child care programs,
services from birth through age 8
center-based programs, and school-based programs. This mixed-
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act is a law that ensures
delivery approach applies to the state’s Universal Prekindergarten
access to special education and related services for eligible
Education system as well and is considered a national best practice.
children with disabilities. Infants and toddlers (birth through age 2)
Vermont increases equitable access to licensed and regulated
with disabilities, developmental delays, or who are at risk of a
child care through the Child Care Financial Assistance Program.
developmental delay due to a medical condition receive Early
Changes to eligibility mandated in Act 76, Vermont’s child
Intervention under IDEA Part C. Children and youth ages 3 through 21
care law, will incrementally increase eligibility to allow
9
receive special education and related services under IDEA Part B. 
financial assistance to families making up to 575% of the
12
federal poverty level ($172,000 for a family of four in 2023). 
IDEA PART C: Early Intervention
In September 2023, there were 5,367 children whose families
In Vermont, IDEA Part C Early Intervention (EI) is provided through
received support through the Child Care Financial Assistance
Children’s Integrated Services (CIS). CIS-EI includes a broad
Program (CCFAP), with 3,358 children (63%) being under
array of services such as developmental education, speech and
the age of 5. Approximately 1% of children receiving CCFAP
language therapy, physical therapy, and occupational therapy.
use out-of-state care in New Hampshire, Massachusetts,
Between December 2, 2021, and December 1, 2022, 78.1% of the
13
or New York. 
1,408 CIS-EI referrals resulted in an initial One Plan, Vermont’s
Individualized Family Services Plan. During this same time frame,
10
2,207 children under age 3 received CIS-EI services. 

IDEA PART B: Early Childhood Special Education Services
In December 2022,
Early Childhood Special Education Services supports children
there were 7,288 individuals
ages 3 to 6 years with special education extending to age 22.
working in regulated child
Individualized education plans (IEP) are developed and
care settings in positions
implemented to ensure a child’s right to a Free and Appropriate
Public Education under IDEA. As can be seen in Table 3, during the
working directly with children,
15
2022–2023 school year, 4,805 students ages 3 through 8
a 1.9% increase from 2020. 
received services through an individualized education plan (IEP),
480 received services under a 504 plan, and 1,397 received
11
services from an educational support team (EST). 

| 
2023 Year in Review 25
CHILD DEVELOPMENT & EDUCATION

In December 2022, there were 16,707 children up to 5 (and not
Figure 13: Universal Prekindergarten Education Enrollment
19
yet enrolled in kindergarten) enrolled in regulated child care, with
by School Year
14 
an additional 3,899 school-aged children enrolled. 
As can be
seen in Figure 12, 18% were infants (under 2), 16% were toddlers
8,841
8,807 
8,598 
8,334
(age 2) and 66% were preschoolers (ages 3–4). The vast majority
8,115 
8000
7,541 
7,301 
of children were enrolled in center-based child care programs
6,904 
6,214 
(85.9%), followed by registered family child care homes (12.6%) and
14 
6000
licensed family child care homes (1.5%).
This includes children
enrolled in private Universal Prekindergarten Education (UPK)
programs through Act 166 but does not include those enrolled
4000
in school-based UPK programs. Updated data on the supply and
demand of child care will be released in spring 2024.
2000

Figure 12: Enrollment in Regulated Child Care Programs
2018 2020 2022
2016
14
(2022 - 2023) 
12,000
18 
As can be seen in Figure 13, UPK enrollment dropped
3,537 (42%).
9,000
to 6,904 during the 2020–2021 school year but is now approaching
pre-pandemic levels, with 8,334 students enrolled during the
6,000
19 
2022–2023 school year. 
It is not yet clear what the consequences
2,996
2,620
11,097
3,000
will be for the approximately 2,000 children who were not enrolled
in UPK in the 2020–2021 school year.
0
Infants
Toddlers Preschoolers
Exclusionary Discipline (Suspension and Expulsion)
Students who are suspended “are at a significantly higher risk of
Head Start and Early Head Start
falling behind academically, dropping out of school, and coming
Head Start and Early Head Start (HS/EHS) are comprehensive
20 
into contact with the juvenile justice system.” 
Act 35 of 2021
early education programs for children from low-income and
prohibits exclusionary discipline (broadly defined as suspension
vulnerable families from birth to age 5. In addition to helping
and expulsion) for children under age 8 in public schools except
children prepare for kindergarten and beyond, HS/EHS help
when the student “poses an imminent threat of harm or danger to
facilitate critical health services, like immunizations and vision, dental,
21 
others.” 
Act 166 of 2022 expanded the restrictions to students
and hearing screenings, in addition to providing other wraparound
attending independent schools and private prequalified Universal
support services for families. From September 2022 to August 2023,
21
Prekindergarten Education programs. 
Vermont Head Start (HS) served 725 children from age 3 to 5,
and Early Head Start (EHS) served 508 infants and toddlers and
16
Between September 2022 and October 2023, there were 101
41 prenatal birthing parents, for a total of 1,274 individuals. 
reported exclusionary discipline incidents (suspensions
For program year 2023, there were 577 staff in HS/EHS programs.
and expulsions) for children enrolled in UPK, 28% of which
Of all staff, 18.9% (109) left during the program year, with 18
16
vacancies remaining unfilled for a period of three months or longer.
involved children on an Individualized Education Plan (IEP).
These high rates of turnover and vacancy make it difficult to provide
During this same time period, there were five incidents of
consistent and high-quality services to particularly vulnerable
restraint and seclusion. These reported events happened across
children and families.
21 programs in both school-based (52 incidents) and private
22 
programs (49 incidents).
Across the country, exclusions impact
certain groups of students disproportionately. Black or African
Universal Prekindergarten Education
American students are suspended at 2.5 times and expelled at
Act 166 offers Universal Prekindergarten Education (UPK) to all
3.2 times their rate of enrollment. Students receiving special
3- and 4-year-olds, and to 5-year-olds not enrolled in kindergarten,
education services through an IEP are suspended at 1.8 times
for up to 10 hours a week of publicly-funded pre-K for 35 weeks of
23 
and expelled at 2.6 times their rates of enrollment. 
The Agency
the academic year. Vermont’s mixed-delivery system means that
these hours can be used in school-based programs or in prequalified
of Education and the Child Development Division are actively
prekindergarten center-based child care and family child care
partnering to improve and streamline the identification of incidents
17 
In September 2023, there was a reported preschool
programs.
and support programs to reduce exclusionary discipline and
capacity of 8,432 slots. The 243 privately operated UPK programs
provide more equitable access to inclusive early care and
held 4,895 slots (58%) and the 147 school-based UPK programs held
education opportunities.

| 
26 The State of Vermont's Children
for all students, collectively and also broken up by various
Afterschool and Out-of-School Time Care (Third Space)
student characteristics. TSGold, R4K!S, and spring 2023 Cognia
In September 2023, there were 11,233 regulated slots for
math and reading results are expected to be released over the course
18 
school-aged children (6-13). 
Of note, one slot may serve multiple
of spring 2024. We look forward to publishing these indicators in
children based on full-time or part-time schedules, and this data
future reports and on VermontKidsData.org.
only captures regulated programs rather than the broader array of
afterschool and summer programming. A 2020 survey found that
Third Grade Math and Language Arts Assessments
over 39% of Vermont’s children would participate in an afterschool
At the end of third grade, Vermont students are assessed on their
24
program if one were available to them.
proficiency in reading and math. The Smarter Balanced Assessment
Consortium (SBAC) for Third Grade Language Arts (reading) and
In 2023, the Legislature directed that funds from the sales and use tax
Math was last conducted in school year 2021–2022, and results
on cannabis be used to expand summer and afterschool programs,
are presented below. Of note, the Agency of Education includes
with an emphasis on increasing access in underserved areas
the following limitations to interpretation: “While the 2022
25 
of Vermont. 
Before these funds became available, the creation
administration of assessments was far smoother than the 2021
and expansion of afterschool and summer programs were funded
administration, there were pandemic-related challenges, such as
by Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief through
educator shortages leading to insufficient resources to properly
Vermont Afterschool and supported by the AOE. In summer 2023,
administer the assessments and the need to balance academic
the last of the Expanding Access grant dollars were invested, with
assessment with critical activities related to students’ social
976 added days serving 4,734 elementary-aged children. In total,
emotional well-being. These issues may have impacted student
between May 2022 and August 2023, Expanding Access grants
performance or test participation, which makes comparing 2022
supported an additional 10,486 elementary-aged children in
27
data to previous years far more difficult.”
26 
accessing afterschool and summer programming. 
In addition,
Room for Me Grants, funded by the DCF-Child Development Division
As can be seen in Figure 14, proficiency rates from the 2021–2022
and administered by Vermont Afterschool, expanded access to an
school year vary based on economic status, race, and homelessness,
estimated 298 slots during the first grant cycle and 567 slots in the
culminating in a comparison between historically marginalized and
26
second grant cycle.
1 
historically advantaged students.
For “historically marginalized”
students, 25.3% are proficient or above in reading, compared to
Educational Assessments
27
52.7% for “historically advantaged” students.
Three key assessments are currently used to measure Vermont
children’s knowledge, skills, and behaviors: Teaching Strategies Gold
In addition to variations in proficiency based on individual
(TSGold), the Agency of Education’s Ready for Kindergarten! Survey
student characteristics, there are large variations across the state.
(R4K!S), and third grade assessments through the Smarter Balanced
The percent of students proficient or above in third grade reading
Assessments (SBAC) (through the 2021–2022 school year) and the
ranges from a low of 8% in Winooski to a high of 67.53% in the
Cognia Assessments (beginning in the 2022–2023 school year).
27
Washington Central Supervisory Union. 
Below is the overview of spring 2022 SBAC assessments

27
Figure 14: Percent of Third Graders Proficient or Above in Reading by Characteristics Spring 2022

51%
53%
48%
41%
41%
42%

31%
25%
24%
12%
8%

All Students     FRL  Not FRL    Special Ed No Special                Black White HistoricallyHistorically
McKinneyNot McKinney
Eligible Eligible Ed                            Marginalized Advantaged
Vento  Vento
Eligible Eligible

1 
Historically Marginalized: Historically Marginalized Students are those students who have been historically underserved by educational institutions for any one, or more than
one, characteristic including ethnic and racial minorities, English Learners, students with Free and Reduced Lunch, students with disabilities, and students who are migrant,
28
foster, or homeless. Historically Privileged Students are those students who have none of the characteristics that are associated with being underserved. 

| 
2023 Year in Review 27
REGIONAL PROFILES

Introduction to Regional Profiles
The following regional profiles offer a snapshot of selected indicators of child and family well-being for each of Vermont’s 12 regions,
which line up with the Agency of Human Services Districts. Each indicator represents the most high-quality, up-to-date data
that is available at the regional level and includes comparison data when possible.

This report draws from multiple sources of Vermont data, not all of which use the same geographic boundaries. Several indicators are only
available at the county or hospital service area level. When necessary, multiple areas are included to provide a more inclusive picture of the region.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
59,173
Decreased from 61,538 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
(20,838)
28.9% 
Decreased from 33.4% in 2017 (24,932)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)
CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($25.05/hr)
children under 9
474 
$104,193
State of Vermont
Decreased from 657 in 2018

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

children under 12
State of Vermont
1,441 
63% 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

7
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)

All Students Historically Marginalized
41.17%                          25.3%
Historically Privileged
52.7%

| 
28 The State of Vermont's Children
Addison
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Building resilience in children, families,
and communities.
• Quality and capacity of child care and early
childhood services.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
3,144
Decreased from 3,246 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
23.4% 
(908)
Decreased from 30% in 2017 (1,238)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($24.92/hr)
children under 9
31 
$103,680
Decreased from 37 in 2018
Addison County

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

Middlebury HSA
74% 
children under 12
210 
Burlington HSA
76% 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

7
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)

Historically Marginalized Students
Supervisory Union/School District          All Students

26.3%
Addison Central SD                48.7%
Not Available
Addison Northwest SU               Not Available
26.3%
Mount Abraham Union SD             51.7%
10.5%
Slate Valley Unified Union SD            33.3%

| 
2023 Year in Review 29
REGIONAL PROFILES

Bennington
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Building resilience in children, families,
and communities.
• Early childhood workforce.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
3,411
Decreased from 3,537 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
38.3% 
(1,701)
Decreased from 43% in 2017 (1,833)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($24.12/hr)
children under 9
47 
$100,326
Decreased from 61 in 2018
Bennington County

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

Bennington HSA
children under 12
210 
61% 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)

Supervisory Union/School District          All Students           Historically Marginalized Students

Bennington Rutland SU              42.0%              20.7%
Southwest Vermont SU              Not Available           18.0%
Windham Southwest SU              Not Available           Not Available

| 
30 The State of Vermont's Children
Caledonia & Southern Essex
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Child and family mental health.
• Quality and capacity of child care and early
childhood services.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
3,106
Decreased from 3,338 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
37.3% 
(1,368)
Increased from 35.9% in 2017 (1,481)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($23.09/hr) Caledonia County
$96,067 
children under 9
21 
($22.01/hr) Essex County
$91,553
Decreased from 38 in 2018

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

St Johnsbury HSA
55% 
children under 12
113 
White River Junction HSA
50% 
Caledonia and Essex Counties
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)

Supervisory Union/School District          All Students           Historically Marginalized Students

Caledonia Central SU               42.6%              21.7%
Kingdom East                  25.7%              Not Available
Orange East SU                  46.6%              35.8%
St. Johnsbury SD                 38.6%              26.9%

| 
2023 Year in Review 31
REGIONAL PROFILES

Central Vermont
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Access to basic needs.
• Early childhood workforce.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
6,120
Decreased from 6,595 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
28.6% 
(2,109)
Decreased from 35% in 2017 (2,754)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($23.79/hr) Orange County
$98,984 
children under 9
39


($24.34/hr) Washington County
$101,553
Decreased from 67 in 2018

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

Orange and Windsor Counties
112 
Barre HSA
57% 
Washington County 
240 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)
All Students
Supervisory Union/School District
Historically Marginalized Students
33.8%
21.9%
Barre SU
42.6%
21.7%
Caledonia Central SU
28.1%
20%
Central Vermont SU
58.5%
40%
Harwood Unified Union SD
55.3%
25%
Montpelier Roxbury SD
43.7%
30.3%
Orange Southwest SU
67.5%
37%
Washington Central SU

| 
32 The State of Vermont's Children
Chittenden
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Early childhood workforce.
• Quality and capacity of child care and early
childhood services.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
14,957
Decreased from 15,621 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
22.6% 
(4,131)
Decreased from 27.9% in 2017 (5,183)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($27.04/hr)
children under 9
71 
$112,467 
Chittenden County
Increased from 62 in 2018

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

Burlington HSA
children under 12
184 
76% 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)
Supervisory Union/School District         All Students
Historically Marginalized Students
Burlington SD                  42.9%
29.7%
Champlain Valley SD              62.1%
46.9%
Colchester SD                 56.3%
40.9%
Essex Westford SD               51.8%
Not Available
Milton SD                   34%
22.2%
Mount Mansfield Unified Union SD        Not Available
Not Available
South Burlington SD               58.5%
46.6%
Winooski SD                  8%
2.9%
| 
2023 Year in Review 33
REGIONAL PROFILES

Franklin & Grand Isle
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Building resilience in children, families,
and communities.
• Early childhood workforce.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
6,478
Decreased from 6,603 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
24.6% 
(1,917)
Decreased from 28% in 2017 (2,203)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($25.39/hr) Franklin County
$105,622 
children under 9
56 
($24.97/hr) Grand Isle County
$103,884
Decreased from 105 in 2018

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

Burlington HSA
76% 
children under 12
75 
St. Albans HSA
71% 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)

Supervisory Union/School District          All Students
Historically Marginalized Students

Franklin Northeast SU               Not Available
Not Available
Franklin West SU                 31.9%
2.6%
Grand Isle SU                   34.9%
20%
Maple Run SD                  30.1%
14.3%
Missisquoi Valley SD               41.7%
32.4%

| 
34 The State of Vermont's Children
Lamoille Valley
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Child and family mental health.
• Building an accessible, equitable, and seamless
system of services.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
3,190
Decreased from 3,394 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
25.7% 
(989)
Decreased from 37.5% in 2017 (1,593)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

children under 9
($23.93/hr)
21 
$99,553 
Decreased from 38 in 2018
Lamoille County

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

children under 12                 Morrisville HSA
119 54% 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)

Supervisory Union/School District          All Students           Historically Marginalized Students

Lamoille North SU                 Not Available           Not Available
Lamoille South SU                 57.5%              57.5%
Orleans Southwest SU               36.5%              36.5%

| 
2023 Year in Review 35
REGIONAL PROFILES

Northern Windsor & Orange
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Child and family mental health.
• Quality and capacity of child care and early
childhood services.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
4,412
Decreased from 4,537 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
31.9% 
(1,814)
Decreased from 33.5% in 2017 (1,861)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($23.79/hr) Orange County
$98,984 
children under 9
21 
($24.34/hr) Windsor County
$101,272
Increased from 42 in 2018

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

Randolph HSA
73% 
children under 12
112 
White River Junction HSA
50% 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)
Supervisory Union/School District         All Students
Historically Marginalized Students
Hartford SD                  Not Available
Not Available
Orange East SU                 46.6%
35.8%
Orange Southwest SU              43.7%
30.3%
Rivendell Interstate SD              Not Available
Not Available
SAU 70                    77.5%
54.6%
White River Valley SU              37.4%
30.4%
Windsor Central SU               Not Available
Not Available
Windsor Southeast SU              33%
18.2%
| 
36 The State of Vermont's Children
Orleans & Northern Essex
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Building resilience in children, families,
and communities.
• Access to basic needs.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
2,829
Increased from 2,829 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
39.9% 
(1,917)
Increased from 38.4% in 2017 (1,301)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($25.39/hr) Essex County
$91,553 
children under 9
32 
($24.97/hr) Orleans County
$97,438
Increased from 21 in 2018

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

children under 12
Newport HSA
85 
44% 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)

Historically Marginalized Students
Supervisory Union/School District          All Students

Not Available
Essex North SU                  Not Available
19.2%
North Country SU                 23.8%
Not Available
Orleans Central SU                32.3%

| 
2023 Year in Review 37
REGIONAL PROFILES

Rutland
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Child and family mental health.
• Quality and capacity of child care and early
childhood services.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
5,379
Decreased from 5,498 from 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
27.4% 
(1,775)
Decreased from 31.1% in 2017 (2,066)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($23.82/hr)
children under 9
65 
$99,106 
Consistent with 65 in 2018
Rutland County

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

children under 12
Rutland HSA
115 
50% 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)
Supervisory Union/School District         All Students
Historically Marginalized Students
Bennington Rutland SU             42%
20.7%
Greater Rutland County SU            Not Available
Not Available
Mill River Unified Union SD            27.9%
Not Available
Rutland City SD                 18.3%
9.3%
Rutland Northeast SU              Not Available
15.8%
Slate Valley Unified Union SD           33.3%
10.5%
Two Rivers SU                 32.5%
22.6%
Windsor Central SU               Not Available
Not Available
| 
38 The State of Vermont's Children
Southeast Vermont
REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Building resilience in children, families,
and communities.
• Building an accessible, equitable, and seamless
system of services.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
3,098
Decreased from 3,194 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
40.3% 
(1,551)
Increased from 39.7% in 2017 (1,545)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($25.78/hr)
children under 9
35 
$107,235 
Decreased from 96 in 2018
Windham County

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

Bennington HSA
61% 
children under 12
35 
Brattleboro HSA
61% 
In the past 12 months for children under 3
From Coordinated Entry
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)

Supervisory Union/School District          All Students           Historically Marginalized Students

Windham Central SU                48.4%              Not Available
Windham Northeast SU              Not Available           25.5%
Windham Southeast SU                               25.5%
38.8%
Windham Southwest SU                               Not Available
Not Available

| 
2023 Year in Review 39
REGIONAL PROFILES

Springfield Area

REGIONAL PRIORITIES:
• Child and family mental health.
• Access to basic needs.

1 
CHILD POPULATION (2022)

children under 10
3,034
Decreased from 3,146 in 2017

* 
CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY(2022)

children under 12
34.7% 
(1,190)
Decreased from 46.3% in 2017 (1,874)

4 
3 
PRE-TAX ANNUAL LIVING WAGE (2023)            CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-HOME CUSTODY(2023)

($25.78/hr) Windham County
$107,235 
children under 9
21 
($24.34/hr) Windsor County
$101,272
Decreased from 48 in 2018

CHILDREN RECEIVING HOMELESSNESS
6 
5
DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING RATES(2021)
SUPPORTS

children under 12
Springfield HSA
21 
68% 
From Coordinated Entry
In the past 12 months for children under 3
*
Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

5
Third Grade Reading All Third Grade Students Reading at or Above Proficient (Spring 2022)
Supervisory Union/School District         All Students           Historically Marginalized Students

Bennington Rutland SU             42%               20.7%

Springfield SD                 28.6%              14.7%

Two Rivers SU                 32.5%              22.6%

Windham Central SU               48.4%              Not Available

Windham Northeast SU             Not Available           25.5%

Windsor Central SU               Not Available           Not Available

Windsor Southeast SU              33%               18.6%

| 
40 The State of Vermont's Children
LIMITATIONS

The State of Vermont’s Children: 2023 Year in Review presents the most high-quality, up-to-date data available as of December
2023. The staff at Building Bright Futures strive to put forward the best data possible in the report. However, there are several
limitations worth noting.

Age Ranges: Data used in this report focuses on different age ranges that may or may not be comparable across programs.
For example, some datasets and programs focus on children from the prenatal period to age 3, while others capture data on children
prenatal to age 6 or age 8, and others are only available for children under 18.

The COVID-19 pandemic: The pandemic continues to affect the availability and quality of data. As programs have changed in response
to evolving needs, monitoring and evaluation systems have been slow to be updated. It may take more years to determine if the changes
that have occurred starting in March 2020 will be outliers or the start of new trends. In addition, gaps in data collection and issues with the
quality of data collected during 2020 and 2021 will impact our ability to compare data over time.

Data steward capacity: As with the majority of human services sectors, the capacity of data stewards across Vermont’s early childhood
system has been challenged by workforce shortages. At the same time, existing data collections and reports require ongoing attention
and maintenance, while new legislation has meant an increase in reporting and analysis requirements. In several cases, data were not
available by the deadline for publication. When possible, these indicators will be available at VermontKidsData.org.

Geography: This report draws from multiple sources of data, not all of which use the same geographic boundaries.

Proxy measures: Due to the small population of Vermont and the current data infrastructure, proxy measures from national datasets
and indicators that capture only a small part of the picture are standard. For example, regulated child care utilization data is available
and reported, but neither the full scope of the demand for these services nor the utilization of unregulated child care is available.

Time frames: The timing of data collection and reporting varies among and sometimes within programs. Data in this report capture a
range of indicators from the last three years and include state and federal fiscal years, calendar years, school years, and point-in-time counts.
High-quality data often take months or years to be released. Therefore, data in this report may not include recent events or policy changes,
such as the July 2023 flooding or the changing policy for the Child Tax Credit.

Validations: It is not possible for our small team to externally validate data provided to us. We rely on the integrity of the data provided to
us by our experienced data partners.

| 
2023 Year in Review 41
ACRONYMS

3SquaresVT: Vermont’s Supplemental Nutrition           GA: General Assistance Emergency Housing
Assistance Program (SNAP)
HS/EHS: Head Start/Early Head Start
504: Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
HUD: Housing and Urban Development
ACEs: Adverse Childhood Experience
IDEA: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
AHS: Agency of Human Services
IEP: Individualized Education Plan
AOE: Agency of Education
MAT: Medication Assisted Treatment
ASQ: Ages and Stages Questionnaire
MESCH: Maternal Early Childhood Sustained Home-Visiting
BEAD: Broadband Equity, Access, and Deployment Program
MIT: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
BBF: Building Bright Futures
MMRP: Maternal Mortality Review Panel
CACFP: Child and Adult Care Food Program
PAT: Parents as Teachers
CCFAP: Child Care Financial Assistance Program
PCC: Parent Child Center
CCWIS: Comprehensive Child Welfare Information System
PHA: Public Housing Agency
CEP: Community Eligibility Provision
PMAD: Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders
CDD: Child Development Division (A Division of the
PNMI: Private Non-Medical Institutions
Department for Children and Families)
PRAMS: Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System
CDDIS: Child Development Division Information System
PQC-VT: Perinatal Quality Collaborative Vermont
CIS: Children’s Integrated Services
R4K!S: Ready for Kindergarten Survey
COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019
SAC: State Advisory Council
DA: Designated Mental Health Agency
SBAC: Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium
DCF: Department for Children and Families
SD/SU: School District/Supervisory Union
DMH: Department of Mental Health
SDOH: Social Determinants of Health
DULCE: Developmental Understanding and Legal
SSA: Specialized Service Agencies
Collaboration for Everyone
SUD: Substance Use Disorder
ED: Emergency Department
TANF: Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
EI: Early Intervention
TSGOLD: Teaching Strategies Gold
ELL: English Language Learner
UPK: Universal Prekindergarten Education
EST: Educational Support Team
VCHIP: Vermont Child Health Improvement Program
FPL: Federal Poverty Level
VDH: Vermont Department of Health
FRL: Free and Reduced Lunch
VECAP: Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan
FSD: Family Services Division
WIC: Women Infants and Children
(A Division of the Department for Children and Families)
FSH: Family Supportive Housing

| 
42 The State of Vermont's Children
REFERENCES

DEMOGRAPHICS
1. Vermont Department of Health. Population of Vermont by AHS/VDH Districts, Age and Sex,  20. Vermont Coalition to End Homelessness and Chittenden County Homeless Alliance. (2023).
2020-2022. https://www.healthvermont.gov/health-statistics-vital-records/vital-
Vermont’s Annual Point-in-Time Count of Those Experiencing Homelessness.
records-population-data/vermont-population-estimates
https://helpingtohousevt.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/2023-Vermont-Point-in-
Time-Report-6-6-23.pdf
2. Vermont Department of Health
. Population of Vermont by AHS/VDH Districts, Age and Sex,
2020-2022. https://www.healthvermont.gov/health-statistics-vital-records/vital-
21. Department of Children and Families. (2023).
Family Supportive Housing Program Annual
records-population-data/vermont-population-estimates
Report: State Fiscal Year 2023. https://outside.vermont.gov/dept/DCF/Shared%20
Documents/OEO/FSH/FSH-AR-SFY2023.pdf
3. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates, (2017, 2022)
Table B17024, Vermont. https://data.census.gov
Coordinated Entry Overview.
22. Vermont Coalition to End Homelessness. (2023).
https://helpingtohousevt.org/whatwedo/coordinatedentry/overview/
4. Department for Children and Families.(2022). FSD Quarterly Management Reports,
Q3 annually. Data provided by the Division Quality Assurance Supervisor.
23. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). (2022).
Establishing and Operating
a Continuum of Care, 24 C.F.R § 578.5. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2022-
5. U.S. Census Bureau. (2023). TTable S0901 Children Characteristics.
title24-vol3/pdf/CFR-2022-title24-vol3-sec578-7.pdf
Retrieved from https://data.census.gov
24. Institute for Community Alliances. (2023).
Cumulative Coordinated Entry Data by Age.
BASIC NEEDS
Publicly accessible System Performance Measure data available at https://icalliances.
1. Prenatal-To-3 Policy Impact Center. (n.d.).
Sufficient Household Resources.
org/vermont-system-performance-measures
https://pn3policy.org/policy-goals/2022-sufficient-household-resources/#why-is-
25. Department for Children and Families. (n.d.).
Addressing and Preventing Unsheltered
sufficient-household-resources-an-important-prenatal-to-3-goal
Homelessness. https://dcf.vermont.gov/Addressing-and-Preventing-Unsheltered-
Food Insecurity Literature Summary.
2. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Homelessness
https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/social-determinants-health/literature-
26. Burlington Housing Authority. (n.d.). Applicants.
summaries/food-insecurity
https://burlingtonhousing.org/rental-assistance/super-section.php?id=3
Stable housing is foundational to children's well-being. Center on Budget
3. Acosta, S. (2022).
27. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). (n.d.). Housing Choice
and Policy Priorities. https://www.cbpp.org/blog/stable-housing-is-foundational-to-
Voucher (HCV) Data Dashboard. https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_indian_
childrens-well-being
housing/programs/hcv/dashboard
28. Department of Children and Families. (2023).
The effects of housing insecurity on children’s health: a scoping review.                Evaluation of Reach Up: State Fiscal Year 2023.
4. Bess et al. (2022).
Oxford Academic. https://academic.oup.com/heapro/advance-article-abstract/      https://legislature.vermont.gov/assets/Legislative-Reports/Evaluation-of-Reach-Up-
doi/10.1093/heapro/daac006/6522744                   January-2023.pdf
5. Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. (2022).        29. Department of Children and Families (2022).
Poverty Guidelines.                 Reach Up Demographics and Caseload Trends:
ASPE. https://aspe.hhs.gov/topics/poverty-economic-mobility/poverty-guidelines     State Fiscal Year 2022. https://outside.vermont.gov/dept/DCF/Shared%20Documents/
ESD/Reports/RU-Demographics-FFY2022.pdf
6. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates, (2017, 2022)
30. Department for Children and Families.
Reach up Benefit. Unpublished data.
Table B17024, Vermont. data.census.gov
31. USDA Economic Research Service. (2023).
Food Security in the U.S. https://www.ers.
7. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates, (2022)
usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-u-s/measurement/
Table DP03, Vermont. data.census.gov
32. USDA Economic Research Service. (2023).
Statistical Supplement to Household
8. R-CPI-U-RS Homepage: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (n.d.).
Food Security in the United States in 2022. https://www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/
https://www.bls.gov/cpi/research-series/r-cpi-u-rs-home.htm
publications/107710/ap-119.pdf?v=1067.8
9. Glasmeier, Amy K. (2023). Living Wage Calculator. Massachusetts Institute of Technology
33. USDA Economic Research Service. (2022). S
tatistical Supplement to Household
https://livingwage.mit.edu/
Food Security in the United States in 2021. https://www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/
10. Basic Needs,
Housing Allowance and Maximum Grants Outside and Inside Chittenden County.
publications/104663/ap-105.pdf?v=6435.9
(2022). https://outside.vermont.gov/dept/DCF/Shared%20Documents/ESD/Reports/RU-
34. Vermont Agency of Education Child Nutrition Programs. (2023).
Annual Statistical Report.
Benefit-Calculation-FFY2022.pdf
(2022–2023). https://education.vermont.gov/document/2023-free-and-reduced-
11. FRED Economic Data | St. Louis Fed. (2023, January 1).
State Minimum Wage Rate for Vermont.
eligibility-report
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/STTMINWGVT
35. Vermont Agency of Education Child Nutrition Programs. (2022).
Annual Statistical Report.
12. Vermont Housing Finance Agency. (n.d.).
30,000 to 40,000 more Vermont homes needed
(2021–2022). https://education.vermont.gov/documents/edu-nutrition-2022-free-and-
by 2030. https://www.vhfa.org/news/blog/30000-40000-more-vermont-homes-
reduced-eligibility-report
needed-2030#:~:text=To%20meet%20expected%20demand%20and
36. Food and Nutrition Service. (n.d.).
CEP Final Rule Summary.
13. Act 47 of 2023. Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 24 V.S.A. § 4414
https://www.fns.usda.gov/cn/cep-final-rule-summary
14. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates, (2023)
37. Food and Nutrition Service. (n.d.).
National School Lunch Program and School Breakfast
Tables B25070 and B25091, Vermont (2022) data.census.gov
Program Demonstration Projects to Evaluate Direct Certification with Medicaid.
https://www.fns.usda.gov/cn/direct-certification-medicaid-demonstration-project
15. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates, (2022)
Table DP04, Vermont. data.census.gov
38. Vermont Agency of Education (2023). Unpublished data.
39. Department for Children and Families. (2023). Vermont Child Care Provider Data. https://
Primary home sales, Directory of affordable rental housing.
16. HousingData.org. (n.d.).
data.vermont.gov/Education/Vermont-Child-Care-Provider-Data/ctdw-tmfz/about_data
https://www.housingdata.org/profile/homeownership-costs/primary-home-sales
40. Hunger Free Vermont. (2022).
17. FRED Economic Data | St. Louis Fed. (2023).
30-Year Fixed Rate Mortgage Average in the             Providing Meals in Early Childhood Settings Report.
United States. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MORTGAGE30US
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5f83855960657429dda4af3c/t/63974ad
89923265b82c9f6ac/1670859484765/_OFFICIAL+FINAL_+2022_EC_Report-
The McKinney-Vento
18. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). (2009).
Rev_10_7_22+%281%29+%281%29.pdf
Homeless Assistance Act. https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/HAAA_HEARTH.PDF
41. Department for Children and Families. (2022).
3Squares, Monthly Report by County.
The McKinney-Vento Homelessness Assistance Act defines homelessness
https://outside.vermont.gov/dept/DCF/Shared%20Documents/ESD/ Reports/3SqVT-County.pdf
as lacking a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence which includes
42. Hall, L. (2023, September 21).
End of SNAP’s temporary emergency allotments resulted in
sharing the housing of other persons, living in temporary housing, and places
substantial benefit cut. 
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. https://www.cbpp.org/blog/
not designed for regular sleeping accommodation.
end-of-snaps-temporary-emergency-allotments-resulted-in-substantial-benefit-cut.
19. Vermont Agency of Education.
Number of McKinney Vento Eligible Children Enrolled in
School under 9 by Age. Unpublished data.
| 
2023 Year in Review 43
REFERENCES

43. Vermont Department of Health. Provided by the Public Health Nutrition Specialist for   6. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2023, March 16). Medicaid and CHIP income eligibility
WIC. Unpublished data.                       limits for children as a percent of the federal poverty level KFF.
https://www.kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/medicaid-and-chip-income-
44. Vermont Department of Health. (n.d.).
WIC Plans & Reports. https://www.healthvermont.
eligibility-limits-for-children-as-a-percent-of-the-federal-poverty-level/
gov/family/wic/wic-plans-reports
This table shows Vermont’s eligibility at 317% which includes the 5% income
45. Food and Nutrition Service. (n.d.).
Monthly Cash-Value Voucher/Benefit for FY 2023
disregard established under the Affordable Care Act.
Fruit and Vegetable Purchases. https://www.fns.usda.gov/wic/monthly-cash-value-
7. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2021, August 26). Medicaid Postpartum Coverage Extension Tracker.
voucherbenefit-2023-fruit-vegetable
KFF. https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/medicaid-postpartum-coverage-
46. Vermont Transportation Energy Profile 2021. (2022, March). https://vtrans.
extension-tracker/
vermont.gov/sites/aot/files/planning/documents/planning/2021%20Vermont%20
8. Department of Vermont Health Access. (n.d.). Health Insurance Maps. Retrieved
Transportation%20Energy%20Profile.pdf
November 9, 2023, from https://dvha.vermont.gov/budget-legislative-and-rules/
47. Lou, C. (2022). Updated analysis based on the Henly, J. R., Adams, G. (2018)
Insights on
reports-and-studies/health-insurance-maps
Access to Quality Child Care for Families Living in Rural Areas. Urban Institute.
9. Department of Vermont Health Access. Awaiting publication at Health Insurance Maps.
48. SchoolSpring. Original analysis conducted by Steven Berbeco from 802 Ed of vacancy
https://dvha.vermont.gov/budget-legislative-and-rules/reports-and-studies/health-
data retrieved from https://www.schoolspring.com/
insurance-maps
49. State of Vermont Department of Public Service. (2022).
Broadband High-Speed Internet
10. Vermont Department of Health. Immunizations.
Availability in Vermont. https://publicservice.vermont.gov/telecommunications-and-
https://www.healthvermont.gov/disease-control/immunization
connectivity/broadband-high-speed-internet-availability-vermont
11. Vermont Department of Health. Immunization Registry. Awaiting publication at
50. State of Vermont Department of Public Service. (n.d.).
Vermont to Receive
https://www.healthvermont.gov/stats/registries/immunization-registry
$229 Million From the Federal Government for Broadband Buildout. https://
12. National Center for Health Statistics at CDC. (2022). Immunization.
publicservice.vermont.gov/document/vermont-receive-229-million-federal-
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/immunize.htm
government-broadband-buildout
13. CDC. (2022, August 30). Testing Children for Lead Poisoning.
CHALLENGING CHILDHOOD EXPERIENCES
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/testing-children-for-lead-poisoning.htm
1. Bowen, E. A., & Murshid, N. S. (2016).
Trauma-Informed Social Policy: A Conceptual
14. Lead Poisoning Prevention. Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 18 V.S.A. § 1755.
Framework for Policy Analysis and Advocacy. American Journal of Public Health, 106(2),
15. Division of Environmental Health. (2023). Report to The Vermont Legislature:
Lead
223–229. https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2015.302970
Poisoning Prevention: Report on 2022 Program Outcomes and Activities. Retrieved from
2. Act 204 of 2018. Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 33 V.S.A. § 3401-3403
https://legislature.vermont.gov/assets/Legislative-Reports/Lead-Report-2023final.pdf
3. Quigley, L. B. (2023, July 19).
Guide: Trauma-Informed Community Change. CTIPP.
16. Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative.
National Survey of Children’s Health,
https://www.ctipp.org/post/guide-to-trauma-informed-community-change
2016-2021. Data Resource Center for Child and Adolescent Health supported by the U.S.
4. Harvard University. (2015).
Resilience. Center on the Developing Child at Harvard University.
Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration
https://developingchild.harvard.edu/science/key-concepts/resilience/
(HRSA), Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB). https://www.childhealthdata.org/.
5. Anda et al. (2006). National Scientific Council on the Developing Child, 2005/2014.
Original analyses conducted by Dr. Valerie Harder, Associate Professor and Director, Health
Services Research Team at the Vermont Child Health Improvement Program, University of
6. Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative.
National Survey of Children’s Health,
Vermont and Dora Levinson, MPH, Research and Data Director at Building Bright Futures.
2016-2021. Data Resource Center for Child and Adolescent Health supported by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration
17. Vermont Care Partners. (2023). Provided by the Vermont Department of Mental Health.
(HRSA), Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB). https://www.childhealthdata.org/
Unpublished data.
7. National Coalition Against Domestic Violence. (2011).
National Statistics.
18. Vermont Department of Mental Health. (2023). Child and Adolescent Family Unit.
https://ncadv.org/statistics#:~:text=1%20in%203%20women%20and
Unpublished data.
8. Holt, S., Buckley, H., & Whelan, S. (2008).
The impact of exposure to domestic violence
19. Vermont Association of Hospitals and Health Systems. (2023). Provided by the Director
on children and young people: A review of the literature. Child Abuse and Neglect, 32(8),
of Policy Analysis and Development. Unpublished data.
797-810. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2008.02.004
SPOTLIGHT: PERINATAL HEALTH
9. Vermont Network. (2023). Provided by the Director of Member Relations at vtnetwork.org.
1. Platt, I., Pendl-Robinson, E., Dehus, E., O’Neil, S., Vohra, D., & Zivin, K. (Mathematica);
Awaiting publication in Vermont Network 2023 Data Snapshot.
Kenny, M. & Pentenrieder, L. (Vermont Department of Health). (2023).
Estimating the
10. Department for Children and Families. (2022).
FSD Quarterly Management Reports.
Costs of Untreated Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders in Vermont.
11. Family First Report. (2021).Vermont’s Family First Prevention Services Act Prevention Plan.
https://mathematica.org/publications/societal-costs-of-perinatal-mood-and-anxiety-
https://legislature.vermont.gov/Documents/2022/WorkGroups/Child%20Protection%20
disorders-in-vermont
Oversight/Foster%20Care/W~Aryka%20Radke~Family%20FIrst%20Report~10-29-2021.pdf
2. Luca, D.L., Margiotta, C., Staatz, C., Garlow, E., Christensen, A., & Zivin, K. (2020).
12. Radke, A., Gooley, B., Sausville, B., Joyal, B., Hopkins, G., Mclain, H., Jorgenson, J., & Boudreau, L.
Financial toll of untreated perinatal mood and anxiety disorders among 2017 births
(n.d.).
Vermont’s 2024 Annual Progress and Services Report.
in the United States. American Journal of Public Health, 110(6):888-896. doi:10.2105/
https://outside.vermont.gov/dept/DCF/Shared%20Documents/FSD/Reviews/APSR2024.pdf
AJPH.2020.305619
3. Leiferman, J.A., Farewell, C.V., Jewell, J., Lacy, R., Walls, J., Harnke, B., & Paulson, J.F.
HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
(2021).
Anxiety among fathers during the prenatal and postpartum period: a meta-
1. World Health Organization: WHO. (2019, May 30). Social determinants of health.
analysis. Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2021 Jun;42(2):152-161.
https://www.who.int/health-topics/social-determinants-of-health
doi: 10.1080/0167482X.2021.1885025. Epub 2021 Feb 25. PMID: 33632067.
2. Health insurance coverage of children 0-18 | KFF. (2023, October 27). KFF.
4. Vermont Department of Health. (2023). Vermont Pregnancy Risk Assessment
https://www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/children-0-18/
Monitoring System (PRAMS). Awaiting publication at https://www.healthvermont.gov/
3. Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative. National Survey of Children’s Health,
stats/surveys/pregnancy-risk-assessment-monitoring-system-prams
2016-2021. Data Resource Center for Child and Adolescent Health supported by the U.S.
5. Vermont Department of Health. Provided by the Research and Statistics Chief.
Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration
Data Note: Analyses were limited to discharges of live-born Vermont residents at
(HRSA), Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB). https://www.childhealthdata.org/
Vermont hospitals, excluding transfers from other facilities. Newborns in this analysis
4. Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Continuous Eligibility.
were identified by any mention of ICD-10-CM diagnosis code P96.1. Unpublished data.
https://www.medicaid.gov/chip/eligibility/continuous-eligibility/index.html
6. Vermont Vital Statistics, 2012-2022. 2023 data are preliminary.
5. Act 48 of 2021. Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 33 V.S.A. § 2091-2092

| 
44 The State of Vermont's Children
7. Stalberg, I. (2024). Report to The Vermont Legislature, Maternal Mortality Review Panel, 13. Vermont Department for Children and Families. (2023). Data provided by the Senior
Process and Performance Analyst at the Child Development Division. Awaiting publication.
2024 Report to the Legislature. https://legislature.vermont.gov/assets/Legislative-
Reports/2024-MMRP-Report-Final.pdf
14. Vermont Department of Health. (2021–2022). Child Care Vaccination Coverage Data.
Awaiting publication.
8. Vermont Department of Health. (2021).
Vermont Vital Statistics Annual Report.
https://www.healthvermont.gov/health-statistics-vital-records/vitalrecords-population-
15. Vermont Department for Children and Families. (2023)
Vermont Early Childhood Education
data/vermont-population-estimates
and Afterschool Workforce Report 2023. https://dcf.vermont.gov/cdd/reports
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022).
Breastfeeding Report Card.
16. Vermont Head Start Collaboration Office. (2023). Vermont Program Information Report.
https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/data/reportcard.htm
Available on public request from https://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/
10.
Cost Savings from Expanding Vermont's Perinatal Psychiatric Consultation Service.
17. Act 166 of 2014: Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 16 V.S.A. § 829
(2023). Platt, I., Pendl-Robinson, E., O’Neil, S., Vohra, D., Pentenrieder, L., & Zivin, K.
18. Vermont Data Portal (2023). Vermont Child Care Provider Data. Retrieved on December 5, 2023,
(Mathematica). https://mathematica.org/publications/cost-savings-from-expanding-
from https://data.vermont.gov/Education/Vermont-Child-Care-Provider-Data/ctdw-tmfz/
vermonts-perinatal-psychiatric-consultation-service
about_data
11. Vermont Department of Health. (2023). Family and Child Health and the Vermont Child
19. Vermont Agency of Education. (2023). Vermont Education Dashboard: Enrollment 2023.
Health Improvement Program. Unpublished data.
https://education.vermont.gov/data-and-reporting/vermont-education-dashboard/
12. Vermont Department of Health. (2023). Family and Child Health and the Vermont Child
vermont-education-dashboard-enrollment
Health Improvement Program.
Vermont’s DULCE Financing: From Initial Pilot Site to State
20. The Council of State Governments Justice Center. (2014).
The School Discipline Consensus
Investment and Federal Grant Funding presentation.
Report: Strategies from the Field to Keep Students Engaged in School and Out of the Juvenile
13. Strong Families Vermont. (2023). Unpublished data.
Justice System. https://csgjusticecenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/The_School_
14. Office of Head Start. (2023). Program Information Reports. Available on public request
Discipline_Consensus_Report.pdf
from https://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/
21. Act 166 of 2022. Vt. Stat. Ann., tit. 16 V.S.A. § 1162.
15. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2021, December 17). Paid Leave in the U.S. KFF.
22. Vermont Agency of Education. (2023). Student Support Services: Early Education Team.
https://www.kff.org/womens-health-policy/fact-sheet/paid-leave-in-u-s/
Unpublished data.
16. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2023). Employee Benefits in the United States, March 2023.
23. U.S. Department of Education - Office for Civil Rights. (2023). Student Discipline and
https://www.bls.gov/ebs/publications/employee-benefits-in-the-united-states-march-2023.htm
School Climate in U.S. Public Schools 2020-2021 Civil Rights Data Collection. https://
17. Vermont Department of Health. (2022).
www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/crdc-discipline-school-climate-report.pdf
2020 Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring
System (PRAMS) Highlights. 
https://www.healthvermont.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
24. Afterschool Alliance. (2020).
Vermont After 3PM. http://www.afterschoolalliance.org/
pdf/HSI-stats-PRAMS-2020-Highlights.pdf
AA3PM/data/geo/Vermont/overview
18. Prenatal-To-3 Policy Impact Center. (n.d.).
Paid Family Leave. https://pn3policy.org/
25. Act 78 of 2023: Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 16 § 4018
pn-3-state-policy-roadmap-2022/us/paid-family-leave#notes-and-sources
26. Vermont Afterschool. (2023). Provided by the Executive Director and the Communications
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND EDUCATION
& Development Coordinator. Unpublished data.
1. Vermont Early Childhood Data and Policy Center. (2023).
2022 Early Childhood Family
27. Vermont Agency of Education. (2023). Vermont Education Dashboard: Assessment 2022.
Needs Assessment. https://vermontkidsdata.org/2022-family-needs-assessment/
https://education.vermont.gov/data-and-reporting/vermont-education-dashboard/
vermont-education-dashboard-assessment
2. Department for Children and Families. (2022). Provided by the Children’s Integrated
Services Director.
Children’s Integrated Services Encounter Report. Unpublished data.
28. U.S. Department of Education. Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Vermont State Plan
Because of the different ways services are funded across the state, this count
2017. https://www2.ed.gov/admins/lead/account/stateplan17/vtcsa2017.pdf
includes clients receiving at least one of the four CIS services in 9 out of 11
REGIONAL PROFILES
regions, but only Early Intervention in the St. Albans and Middlebury regions.
This count also excludes clients who are served but for whom claims are not
1. Vermont Department of Health. (2023).
Population of Vermont by AHS/VDH Districts, Age
submitted, consultation for early childhood education and other programs, and
and Sex, 2000-2022. https://www.healthvermont.gov/health-statistics-vital-records/
undocumented individuals.
vital-records-population-data/vermont-population-estimates
3. Department for Children and Families. (2023). Provided by the Children’s Integrated
2. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates, Table B17024,
Services Director.
Children’s Integrated Services Semi-Annual Performance Report.
Vermont. (2017 and 2022). https://data.census.gov/
Unpublished data.
3. Glasmeier, Amy K. (2023). Living Wage Calculator. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
4. Vermont Parent Child Center Network. (2023). Provided by the Vermont Parent Child
https://livingwage.mit.edu/
Center Network Co-Chair. Unpublished data.
4. Department for Children and Families. (2023).
FSD Quarterly Management Reports, Q3
5. State of Vermont Blueprint for Health. (2022). Community Health Profile Data.
annually. Data provided by the Division Quality Assurance Supervisor.
https://blueprintforhealth.vermont.gov/community-health-profiles
5. Institute for Community Alliances. (2023).
Cumulative Coordinated Entry Data by Age.
6. Vermont Child Health Improvement Program (VCHIP). (2023). Unpublished data.
Publicly accessible System Performance Measure data available at https://icalliances.
org/vermont-system-performance-measures
7. Help Me Grow Vermont. (2023). Ages and Stages (ASQ) Enterprise Online System.
Unpublished data.
6. State of Vermont Blueprint for Health. (2022). Community Health Profile Data.
https://blueprintforhealth.vermont.gov/community-health-profiles
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (n.d.).
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD):
Data & Statistics on Autism Spectrum Disorder. https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/data.html
7. Vermont Agency of Education. (2023). Vermont Education Dashboard: Assessment 2022.
https://education.vermont.gov/data-and-reporting/vermont-education-dashboard/
9. U.S Department of Education. (2018). Individuals with Disabilities Act. Chapter III—
vermont-education-dashboard-assessment
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, Department of Education.
https://sites.ed.gov/idea/regs/
10. Department for Children and Families. (2022). Provided by the Children’s Integrated
Services Director. Awaiting publication in the
Vermont IDEA Part C – Child Count and
Settings at https://dcf.vermont.gov/cdd/reports/ei
11. Vermont Agency of Education. (2022).
Number of Children Receiving Student
SupportServices under 9 by Age. Unpublished data.
12. Act 76 of 2023: Vt. Stat. Ann tit. 16 V.S.A § 4010, tit. 21 V.S.A. §1321, tit. 33 V.S.A. § 3512-3519

| 
2023 Year in Review 45
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The State of Vermont’s Children: 2023 Year in Review is truly a collaborative effort.

On behalf of the Vermont Early Childhood State Advisory Council Network, we would like to express our sincerest gratitude to the following
partners across the early childhood system for their contributions to developing content, identifying and sharing key topics, and providing
data:

The Department of Vermont Health Access, Housing & Homelessness Alliance of Vermont, Hunger Free Vermont, Institute for
Community Alliances, Massachusetts Institute of Technology - Living Wage Calculator, Public Assets Institute, United Ways of Vermont
(Help Me Grow Vermont), Vermont Afterschool, the Vermont Agency of Education, the Vermont Association of Hospitals and Health Systems,
the Vermont Blueprint for Health, Vermont Care Partners, The Vermont Child Health Improvement Program (VCHIP), the Vermont Department
for Children and Families (Child Development Division, Economic Services Division, Family Services Division, Office of Economic Opportunity,
and Vermont Head Start Collaboration Office), the Vermont Department of Health (Family and Child Health Division and Health Statistics
and Informatics), the Vermont Department of Labor, the Vermont Department of Mental Health, the Vermont Head Start Association,
the Vermont Network Against Domestic and Sexual Violence, and the Vermont Parent Child Center Network.

We are incredibly grateful for the collaboration and continuous guidance of the Building Bright Futures State Advisory Council, the 12
Regional Councils, and the 7 Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan Committees.

Thank you to Dave Lapointe and Gary Bisaga for creating the new Early Childhood Data Portal at VermontKidsData.org, which highlights
this report’s data alongside early childhood policy efforts and publications. Your collective expertise, vision, and commitment allow BBF to
compile and disseminate critical data in an easily accessible, dynamic, and responsive way.

We continue to be inspired by Vermont’s commitment to using the most up-to-date, high-quality data to inform policy and service provision
for young children and their families.

| 
46 The State of Vermont's Children
OUR TEAM
STAFF
Dr. Morgan Crossman, Executive Director
Beth Truzansky, Deputy Director
Kate Bailey, Network Manager
Anna Brouillette, Policy and Program Director
Ali Dieng, Regional Manager for Chittenden and Franklin/Grand Isle
Kitty Foster, Data Coordinator
Kelly Hayes, Regional Manager for Central Vermont and Lamoille Valley
Courtney Hillhouse, Regional Manager for Southeast Vermont,
Northern Windsor and Orange, and Springfield Area
Michelle Kersey, Vermont Early Childhood Fund Grant Manager
Tanya LaChapelle, Family Leadership Coordinator
Dora Levinson, Research and Data Director
Linda Michniewicz, Regional Manager for Caledonia/Southern Essex
and Orleans/Northern Essex
Nathaniel Millarhouse, Finance Manager
Katie Mobbs, Office Manager
Jenn Schollmeyer, Data Manager
Darla Senecal, Regional Manager for Bennington, Rutland, and Addison
Valerie F. Wood, Early Childhood Systems Evaluator

STATE ADVISORY COUNCIL
Ilisa Stalberg, SAC Public Co-Chair; Vermont Department of Health
Flor Diaz Smith, SAC Private Co-Chair; Vermont School Boards Association
Rep. Jessica Brumsted, Vermont House of Representatives
Libby Daghlian, Parent Representative
Xusana Davis, Vermont Office of Racial Equity
Paul Dragon, Champlain Valley Office of Economic Opportunity
Alexis Duquette, Parent Representative
Eddie Gale, A. D. Henderson Foundation
Dimitri Garder, Business Representative; Global-Z International
Sen. Ruth Hardy, Vermont Senate
Sharon Harrington, Vermont Association for the Education
of Young Children
Renee Kelly, SAC Secretary; Head Start Collaboration Office
Carol Lang-Godin, Lamoille Family Center
Shayla Livingston, Agency of Human Services
Janet McLaughlin, DCF Child Development Division
Mike McRaith, Vermont Principals’ Association
Meg Porcella, Agency of Education
Christy Swenson, Capstone Community Action/Head Start
Jessica Vintinner, Agency of Commerce and Community Development
Rebecca Webb, SAC Treasurer; Barre Unified Union School District
Cheryle Wilcox, Vermont Department of Mental Health
Miranda Gray, non-voting member; DCF Economic Services Division
Aryka Radke, non-voting member; DCF Family Services Division
Kendal Smith, non-voting member; Vermont Governor’s Office

| 
2023 Year in Review 47
PUBLICATION INFORMATION
2023 Managing Editors
Beth Truzansky, Deputy Director
Dora Levinson, MPH, Research and Data Director
Valerie F. Wood, Ph.D., Early Childhood Systems Evaluator
Jennifer Schollmeyer, BSW, M.Ed., Data Manager
Morgan Crossman, Ph.D., M.A., Executive Director
Kitty Foster, BS, Data Coordinator
Anna Brouillette, M.Ed., Policy and Program Director

Graphic Design & Layout
Alice Jarabek with support from Anna Hudson

Printing & Production
Building Bright Futures would like to thank the National Life Group Foundation for their generous contribution to the production
of this report.

Suggested citation: Levinson, D., Schollmeyer, J., Foster, K., Brouillette, A., Truzansky, B., Wood, V., & Crossman,
M. (Eds.). (2024). The State of Vermont’s Children: 2023 Year in Review. Building Bright Futures: Williston, VT.
Retrieved from buildingbrightfutures.org/publications