THE STATE OF
VERMONT'S CHILDREN
2022 YEAR IN REVIEW
From the
GOVERNOR
Since I first came to office, I have recognized the importance of giving kids the
best possible foundation and that a high quality, comprehensive early
childhood system is essential to that goal.

And I am proud to say, Vermont continues to make significant strides in giving young
kids the best possible start. We have steadily increased our investment in the Child
Care Financial Assistance Program (CCFAP) and in 2022, we made further progress
with additional funding and improvements to this program and more.

This work includes changes to align Vermont with the federal standard
for CCFAP rates, which gives low- and middle-income families access
to more care providers. We also expanded a tax credit that offsets
the cost of child and dependent care for working families, including those
who do not qualify for state subsidies through CCFAP. And we continued
supporting our expanded afterschool and summer programming, which not only helps healthy development, but also supports our
substance use prevention goals and offers another tool in our work to help address learning loss resulting from the pandemic closures.

However, we still have a lot more to do to help our kids – from infants all the way through grade 12 – recover and we know it is not
as easy as going back to our pre-pandemic approach. It has been my vision to think more holistically about education from Cradle
to Career, so we are supporting all our kids from early care and learning to pre-K to K – 12, post-secondary education and
even into workforce training. I am confident we can continue building on our progress, learn the lessons of the pandemic, and ensure
our kids have a strong foundation and a bright future.

Finally, I want to thank Vermont’s early childhood workforce. I know the last few years – from the pandemic to continued recovery
efforts to notable shortages in workforce – early childhood educators, early interventionists, mental health providers and the health
care workforce more broadly, along with others, have stepped up in a big way to help your communities. Without you, Vermont families
and children would not have access to the care and services they deserve, and I greatly appreciate your work.

The 2022 issue of this report, along with the ongoing efforts of Vermont’s Early Childhood Data and Policy Center, serves as a critical
tool for data-driven decision-making for our kids and their families. I am grateful for the role it plays in supporting our collective work
as a state to make Vermont the best possible place for children and families to live.

Sincerely,

Philip B. Scott
Governor
From the

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND STATE
ADVISORY COUNCIL CO-CHAIRS
The Building Bright Futures (BBF) Early Childhood State Advisory Council (SAC)
Network is honored to present the 10th iteration of The State of Vermont’s Children.
As leaders of the Network, we are proud of the important role that this annual report
plays in supporting data-informed decision-making in Vermont’s early childhood system.
Promoting data-driven policy and implementation decisions is one of the key roles
played by BBF and the SAC in order to monitor the state’s early childhood system and
the well-being of the state’s young children and their families over time.

The Network serves as Vermont’s early childhood public-private partnership charged
under State and Federal statute as the Early Childhood State Advisory Council, the
mechanism used to advise the Governor and Legislature on the well-being of children
in the prenatal period through age 8 and their families. This Network currently
Morgan K. Crossman, Ph.D., M.A.
includes over 450 early childhood stakeholders and leaders across all sectors.
Executive Director
One of BBF’s responsibilities is to maintain Vermont’s vision and strategic plan for its
Building Bright Futures
early childhood system, which is done through Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan
(VECAP) (pg. 2).

This year, the report includes the 2023 Recommendations of the Vermont Early
Childhood State Advisory Council Network, formally endorsed by the SAC in
October 2022; data and context across a range of topics including, but not limited to,
demographics, basic needs, resiliency within families and communities, health and
well-being, child development, and education; and profiles of recent successes for
children and families in Vermont’s 12 regions.

The 2022 Data Spotlight highlights the forthcoming Early Childhood Family Needs
Assessment Report developed by the Families and Communities Committee, one of
seven VECAP Committees within the BBF Network. This section elevates the valuable
family leadership and partnership opportunities within Vermont’s early childhood
system and shares some preliminary findings from the family leaders’ survey on barriers
Cheryle Wilcox, LICSW
to access in Vermont’s early childhood system of services.
SAC Public Co-Chair
Mental Health Collaborations Director
The State of Vermont’s Children report covers many aspects of the state’s early
Vermont, Agency of Human Services,
childhood system, but there are often additional data and context that cannot
Department of Mental Health
be included. Vermont’s Early Childhood Data and Policy Center, Vermontkidsdata.org,
plays an important role in filling those gaps. Vermontkidsdata.org is a hub of
high-quality, up-to-date information on the status of children and families
across sectors. By centralizing data from the complex early childhoodsystem,
Vermontkidsdata.org makes it easier for leaders, policymakers, families,
and communities to use data to make informed policy and program decisions.
More information is available on the back cover of this report.

We hope that together, this report and Vermontkidsdata.org will support early
childhood stakeholders, policymakers, and implementing partners in continuing
to make data-informed decisions while placing equity at the center. Using data and
stories to shed light on opportunitiesto strengthen and embed equity in Vermont’s
early childhood is paramount to improving the lives of children and their families
in our communities.

Flor Diaz Smith
SAC Private Co-Chair
Vice President of VSBA Board
Vermont School Board Association
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Role of Building Bright Futures
1
2
The Vermont Early Childhood Action Plan
4
2023 Policy Recommendations
7
Demographics
8
Basic Needs
12
Resilient Families and Communities
14
Health and Well-Being
18
Child Development and Education
22
2022 Family Needs Assessment Preview
24
About Regional Councils
25
Introduction to Regional Profiles
26
Addison Regional Profile
27
Bennington Regional Profile
28
Caledonia and Southern Essex Regional Profile
29
Central Vermont Regional Profile
30
Chittenden Regional Profile
31
Franklin and Grand Isle Regional Profile
32
Lamoille Valley Regional Profile
33
Northern Windsor and Orange Regional Profile
34
Orleans and Northern Essex Regional Profile
35
Rutland Regional Profile
36
Southeast Vermont Regional Profile
37
Springfield Area Regional Profile
39
Limitations
39
Acronyms
40
References
43
Acknowledgments
44
Vermontkidsdata.org
MISSION
To improve the well-being of each and every child and family in
Vermont by using evidence to inform policy and bringing voices
together to discuss critical challenges and problem solve.

VISION
BBF maintains the vision and strategic plan for Vermont’s Early
Childhood System. Vermont’s vision for the Early Childhood
System is to be an integrated continuum of comprehensive,
high-quality services that are equitable, accessible, and improve
outcomes for each and every child in the prenatal period to age
eight and their family.

Building Bright Futures (BBF) is Vermont’s early childhood public-
private partnership, charged under Vermont Title 33 § Chapter 46
and the Federal Head Start Act (Public Law 110-134) as Vermont’s
Convening
Early Childhood State Advisory Council (SAC), the mechanism
used to advise the Governor and Legislature on the well-being of
children in the prenatal period through age 8 and their families.
BBF maintains Vermont's Early Childhood Action Plan, a five-year
Responding
Monitoring
vision and strategic plan. Within these legislative mandates, BBF is
charged with five primary responsibilities: convening, monitoring,
empowering, responding, and advising.

With a wide reach throughout Vermont's Early Childhood System
and in every corner of the state, the Early Childhood State Advisory
Council Network has a multi-tiered infrastructure that includes
the State Advisory Council (SAC), 12 Regional Councils, and 7
Committees that move Vermont's Early Childhood Action Plan
(VECAP) forward. Partners and committees within BBF's Network

Empowering
Advising

POLICY MAKERS

INTERAGENCY
perform a critical role by compiling and distributing the most up-
COORDINATING TEAM
to-date and high-quality quantitative and qualitative data pertaining
STATE ADVISORY COUNCIL
to young children, their families, and the Early Childhood System.

VECAP COMMITTEES
BBF is unique in its ability to be agile in responding to emerging
policy, programmatic, and community needs while also remaining
12 REGIONAL COUNCILS
focused on the long-term health, well-being, early care, and
CHILDREN & FAMILIES
EVIDENCE & DATA
education of Vermont children and their families.

| 
2022 Year in Review 1
THE VERMONT EARLY CHILDHOOD ACTION PLAN

VERMONT’S EARLY CHILDHOOD ACTION PLAN
2020-2025 STRATEGIC PLAN
Vermont aspires to realize the promise of each and every child by ensuring that the early childhood system is an integrated, continuous,
comprehensive, high quality system of services that is equitable, accessible and will improve outcomes for all children in the prenatal period
to age 8 and their families in Vermont.

Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP) is the vision and strategic plan for the early childhood system supporting Vermont
Children prenatal to age 8 and their families. The VECAP was updated in 2020 using a lens of equity, access, and common language,
with a commitment to creating positive change in Vermont’s early childhood system. The strategic plan is centered on four common goals,
with strategies and objectives to meet those goals. For the first time, the 2020-2025 VECAP includes outcomes and indicators to monitor progress.
Vermont intends to meet the goals outlined in this cohesive vision by the year 2026, and utilize the BBF Network to establish shared
accountability for achieving statewide priorities.

The VECAP was originally established in 2013 to emphasize the importance of early childhood outcomes and was built on Vermont’s
Guiding Principles which articulate the commitment to fully include each and every child and their family in a continuum of meaningful
experiences to ensure their health, mental health, safety, happiness, and success now and into the future.

THE VECAP IN ACTION

P
S
R
R
E
E
N
D
A
A
T
R
A
G
L
D
R
3
N
VECAP Committee Network
E
W
S
SYSTEM
R
B
E
The Vermont Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP) committee
O
D
R
A
network alongside Vermont’s Early Childhood State Advisory
N
R
S
G
Council Network (SAC) upholds the vision and strategic plan
D
for Vermont.
N
I
2
N
COMMUNITY
F
A
The seven VECAP committees are guided by the goals and
N
S
T
R
objectives that Vermont has identified as essential. Committees
E
S
D
meet monthly or as needed each led by a public and private
A
R
T
volunteer co-chair. Membership is composed of key stakeholders
O
G
D
T
in the early childhood system; most committees are open to all
D
FAMILY


S
1
L
early childhood stakeholders. Annually VECAP committees and
E
R
S


S
early childhood partners elevate gaps and barriers impacting


R


E
children and families and bring them to the State Advisory
P


N
R


E
E


D
CHILD
S


Council to make policy recommendations.
R
C


A
H


G
O


R
O


E
L


D
E


N
I


R
K
S

In 2020, the early childhood system lost a leader in Mariah McGill (1977-2020). Mariah served as a Regional Coordinator for BBF
and contributed as a keen leader, advocate, and problem solver in other roles throughout the community. Mariah joined the BBF team
in September 2020 and was ebullient with her passion about improving the lives of children and families in Vermont. In her spirit,
we carry on to make true and lasting change.

| 
2 The State of Vermont's Children
HOW TO USE THE VERMONT EARLY CHILDHOOD ACTION PLAN

What Vermont wants to be true for young children and their families pre-natal to eight.
Vision 

Vermont’s Guiding
Our fundamental beliefs to be used throughout the development and implementation of the Vermont
Principles
Early Childhood Action Plan.

Goals
Areas where focused measurement and effort is needed to change outcomes for children and families.

Specific and measurable child-level outcomes for young children from prenatal through age 8 by 2026.
Five Year
An indicator may be aligned to just one aspect of the state’s broader commitment toward one goal, or it
Indicators
may not yet be associated with a reliable data source. Many indicators currently have a reliable statewide
data source or proxy measure. Some of the more complex indicators are still needed to monitor progress.
Both intermediate and five-year indicators will be monitored annually using the VECAP data dashboard on
Vermont’s Early Childhood Data and Policy Center.

Annual measures that indicate trends toward the broader commitment and indicator. Changes in intermediate
Intermediate
indicators allow for us to course-correct our actions over time. Each intermediate indicator has a reliable
Indicators
statewide data source, and most are able to be disaggregated by county, race, or other demographics.

A measurable step Vermonters will take to change outcomes for children and families.
Objectives

Strategies
High level ideas to drive change across Vermont. Anyone across the state can look at the list of strategies
provided as a component of the Vermont Early Childhood Action Plan and be able to apply them to their
own specific context in order to take action. You’ll find a recommended list of strategies in this plan.
Strategies listed are targeted at 1-5 years to achieve.

Specific steps taken by individuals, agencies, groups, organizations or others, to drive change toward
Actions
statewide goals for young children. Actions will turn the curve in Vermont. Activities 0-1 years are captured
in committee/partner organization work plans and not listed in this VECAP.

Vermont’s Early Childhood Data and Policy Center has an interactive VECAP data dashboard with indicators
Measuring Progress
for each domain of the four goals. (See the back cover for how to navigate Vermontkidsdata.org.)

The full strategic plan document including strategies and objectives as well as up to date information on VECAP committees is available
at buildingbrightfutures.org/VECAP.

| 
2022 Year in Review 3
RECOMMENDATIONS & STRATEGIES

2023 POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
VERMONT EARLY CHILDHOOD STATE ADVISORY
COUNCIL NETWORK
The State Advisory Council (SAC) is Vermont’s Governor-appointed, primary advisory body on the well-being of children from
the prenatal period through age eight and their families. In partnership with Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP)
Committees and the Regional Councils, the SAC sets priorities and strategic direction for statewide initiatives using the VECAP
and up-to-date data. The annual recommendations are developed with input across all BBF Network gatherings and seek
to identify the current gaps and needs in policy, promote action in strategic areas for the coming year, ensure recommendations
are measurable, and move Vermont toward a more equitable Early Childhood System.

GOAL 1: ALL CHILDREN HAVE A HEALTHY START

• Promote and invest in care coordination. Invest in proven care coordination models across sectors to better serve
young children and families. Better support access to services for children with special health care needs, children
with disabilities, and other marginalized groups by promoting and investing in valuable models of care coordination.
Explore creative ways to fund and integrate services across sectors to reduce disparities in access to services.

• Invest in safe, permanent housing for children as a critical basic need. Invest in housing programs and resources
that expand availability and promote affordability and equity in Vermont’s rental and real estate markets by means
such as:

f Expanding the Family Supportive Housing Program

f Protecting manufactured home communities by investing in infrastructure repair and maintenance

• Support families who are unhoused or experiencing housing transitions by investing in trauma-responsive shelters,
transitional housing, transportation resources, and related staffing. Ensure children are able to attend school in their
home districts if preferred.

GOAL 2: FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES PLAY
A LEADING ROLE IN CHILDREN’S WELL-BEING
• Representation matters. Develop and implement a formal guidance/protocol when creating new legislatively
mandated bodies (study sections, councils, task forces). A list of potential members should include representatives
with lived experience in those groups.

• Utilize the findings of the BBF Families and Communities Committee’s Family Needs Assessment, which has been
designed and implemented by primary caregivers to inform policy and decision-making related to young children
and their families.

• Provide commensurate compensation for families participating in engagement, leadership, or feedback opportunities
in order to recognize and honor the time and expertise that parents and caregivers contribute. Make other logistical
and cultural decisions that welcome and promote the inclusion of primary caregivers, such as offering alternative
or evening meeting opportunities, paying for any associated child care or transportation costs, and providing
interpretation services.

| 
4 The State of Vermont's Children
GOAL 3: ALL CHILDREN AND FAMILIES HAVE
ACCESS TO HIGH-QUALITY OPPORTUNITIES
TO MEET THEIR NEEDS

• Prioritize and invest in the current early childhood education workforce to ensure the field is justly compensated,
well-resourced, and valued as leaders and partners in the Early Childhood System by:

f Making strategic and substantial investments to bolster the compensation of the early childhood workforce

f Investing in proven professional development programs and ensuring that all early childhood educators have
access to resources and supports that make the field a more sustainable and attractive one, such as practice-
based coaching, mentorship, Special Accommodations Grants, Early Childhood and Family Mental Health
Consultation and treatment, and Early Multi-tiered System of Supports. Ensure these professional development
programs and opportunities are comprehensive and coordinate their offerings and activities.

• Continue to commit to stakeholder engagement and national best practices within the STARS Revision work and
related Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI) efforts. The updated Quality Rating Improvement Scale (QRIS) should
support efforts to dismantle systemically racist and inequitable tools and structures, and to build a system that
supports early childhood education programs in providing the highest quality teacher-child interactions possible
through a continuous quality improvement lens.

• Respond to the mental health challenges facing young children and their families and the need to build resilience in
our communities by:

f Investing in efforts to recruit a diverse mental health workforce reflective of the communities served (including
diversity of race/ethnicity, culture, sexual orientation and identity, socioeconomic status, etc).

f Continuing to increase Medicaid reimbursement rates for mental health services to adjust for the higher cost of
providing services associated with inflation.

f Investing in trauma and resilience training for family-serving providers (in the fields of mental health,
education, etc.) to enable them to be better prepared to respond to the increased mental health needs of children
due to the pandemic. Invest in translation services for training programs to promote equitable and broad access
to training.

| 
2022 Year in Review 5
RECOMMENDATIONS & STRATEGIES

GOAL 4: THE EARLY CHILDHOOD SYSTEM
WILL BE INTEGRATED, WELL-RESOURCED,
AND DATA-INFORMED

• Prioritize collective legislative action and coordination related to early childhood administration, governance,
and any potential investments by holding joint hearings, forming ad hoc committees, and working collaboratively
on hearing key testimony, advancing well-vetted legislation, etc.

• As legislation is considered related to Vermont’s early childhood governance infrastructure, the Legislature
must prioritize accountability by tasking a specific entity to monitor governance transition, with responsibilities
that include:

f Developing a concrete transition plan with accountability and metrics (process and success) prioritizing
cross-sector stakeholder engagement

f Monitoring any and all transitions over time and reporting annually to the Legislature

f Defining and measuring success in process and outcomes using a continuous quality improvement framework

f Ensuring alignment with the vision articulated in the Vermont Early Childhood Action Plan

• Respond to inequities in data collection and reporting in order to better represent and understand the intersectional
experiences of people of color, children with disabilities, and other marginalized communities in Vermont.

f Develop a statewide strategy to gather demographic information that allows people to self-identify in an
authentic and appropriate manner while meeting federal demographic reporting requirements.

f Value qualitative data. When the small population size of a group necessitates the suppression of their
quantitative data, utilize qualitative data collection to ensure that everyone is counted.

f Secure sustained funding to support high-quality data through compensation for direct service providers who
collect and report data.

f Partner with impacted communities throughout the data cycle to ensure that marginalized communities,
in particular, have ownership of their experiences and are empowered to advocate for and make decisions
on behalf of themselves.

f To enable Vermont to execute the above recommendations, secure sustained funding for additional personnel
to increase capacity with a specific focus on equitable data.

LEARN MORE
While the Policy Recommendations can be leveraged in a variety of ways, their foundational goal is to provide
a common agenda and unifying vision for the state’s early childhood system and its partners. The Policy
Recommendations are a tool that requires both championing and monitoring in order to be successful.
Read more in our 2023 Policy Recommendation Playbook at buildingbrightfutures.org/2023-policy-
recommendations/, which outlines the process for developing recommendations, provides more information
on each recommendation, and describes how stakeholders can put the Policy Recommendations into action.

| 
6 The State of Vermont's Children
DEMOGRAPHICS

The following chapters include key indicators of child and family well-being, many of which show trends
over time. Indicators show a snapshot of the status of children and families, but may not reflect the entire
context impacting outcomes.

DEMOGRAPHICS
Who are Vermont’s young children? How many are there? Where do
they live? These factors are important to take into consideration when
crafting policy and designing programs for children and families.

Although the vast majority of Vermont’s population identifies
In 2021, there were an estimated 60,364 children under the
1
as white, the state is growing more racially diverse, especially among
age of 10, including 5,073 babies born to Vermont residents.
young children. Table 1 that the percentage of the population
This number has decreased by 4% from 62,655 in 2015 to 60,364
under age 10 who identify as two or more races or multiracial
in 2021. Where Vermont’s children live aligns with Vermont’s
(4.4%) is more than twice the Vermont population as a whole
population centers: the Burlington area holds 25% of children
(2.1%). Similarly, as seen in Table 2, 3.2% of children under age
under age 10, while the St. Albans, Barre, and Rutland areas hold
10 identify as Hispanic or Latino/a/x compared with 2.2% of
11%, 10%, and 9% respectively.
the population as a whole. In total, 11.5% of Vermont children
Table 1
under 10 belong to the global majority (those who identify
2
Vermont Population by Race and Age Group (2021) 
as not white, and/or those who identify with an ethnicity of
2
Hispanic or Latina/o/x. 
Children   Total
Race 
Under 10  Population
of children under 12 lived in
American Indian
0.4% 0.4%
and Alaska Native 
households with incomes below
30.4%
185% of the federal poverty level,
Asian 2.3% 2.0%
the benchmark for many benefit programs.

f See page 8 for more information about basic needs.
Black or African American 2.0% 1.5%

Native Hawaiian
*** ***
and Other Pacific Islander 
541 children under age 9
3
living in out-of-home protective custody as of 9/30/22
White 90.9% 94.0%
f For more information about resilient families
and communities, see page 12
Two or more races 4.4% 2.1%

Table 2
In 2021, there were 9,258
2
Vermont Population by Ethnicity and Age Group (2021)
children under 18 living with
Children   Total
4
grandparents or other relatives. 
Ethnicity 
Under 10  Population
(7.9% of children under 18).
Hispanic or Latina/o/x 3.2% 2.2%

| 
2022 Year in Review 7
BASIC NEEDS

BASIC NEEDS
Can children and families meet
their basic needs? How many
children are homeless?
Do children and families have
enough food to eat?

VECAP GOAL 1 :
ALL CHILDREN HAVE
A HEALTHY START

The federal poverty level (FPL) is a national guideline used to
The stress of being unable to meet the basic physiological needs
determine eligibility for programs and services - often using 185%
of food and shelter, often due to poverty, impacts the ability of
4
as a guideline. In 2022, the FPL for a family of four was $27,750.
parents and caregivers to create an environment where children
can grow and learn. Food insecurity among children harms
There has been a decrease in the percent of Vermont’s families
cognitive development and contributes to social and behavioral
with children under 12 living below the FPL, from 17% in 2015
1 5
problems in school. 
to 13% in 2020. 
Housing instability can permanently affect
2 3
brain development in children, 
and can impact physical health.
The reality is that the federal poverty level is not a measure of
Meeting these basic needs for all families is critical to ensuring that
family economic well-being. Many Vermonters earning well
children have the opportunity to thrive.
above the FPL struggle to cover the cost of basic needs such
as housing, transportation, and healthcare. This is especially true
Cost of Living
in 2022. Vermont households, on average, were paying $603, or 11%,
The cost of living is a foundational economic measure to
more per month for goods such as food, shelter, transportation,
demonstrate families’ ability to afford basic needs. There are
and energy in total inflation costs in September 2022 compared
several ways to look at this cost, including the federal poverty level
6 
to January 2021. 
This is a significant financial burden to families.
and living wage.

A more detailed picture of the true cost of living for Vermont
Figure 1 Vermont Wage Benchmarks for a Family
families comes from The Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s
4,7,8,9,10
7
of Four 
(MIT) living wage calculator, which is updated annually in January. 
MIT defines a living wage as the “hourly rate that an individual in
a household must earn to support his or herself and their family.”
In Vermont, the necessary annual income to meet the basic
$107,940
$90,556 
needs of a household with two adults and two children
7 
(before taxes) is $107,940. 
As seen in Figure 1 for a family of
8 
four the maximum Reach Up benefit is $12,000;
the 2022 FPL
4 
$52,208
is $27,750;
two adults working at Vermont’s minimum wage
9 
of $12.55 
make $52,208; and the median income in 2021 was
10 
$27,750
$90,556, 
all of which are less than the living wage needed for a
$12,000
family to comfortably meet their needs in Vermont. It is important
to note that this living wage does not include funds for savings,
Maximum
Minimum
Census
Federal               MIT Living
Reach Up
Wage
Family Median
Poverty Level               Wage
emergency expenses, or expenses like meals in restaurants.
Benefit
(2022)
Wage
(2022)                (2022)
It also does not include potential benefits that families may access
(2022)
(2021)
11
depending on their income. 

| 
8 The State of Vermont's Children
SPOTLIGHT ON HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS
The trauma of homelessness, even short term, can have a major effect on a youth’s future
development. Children who experience homelessness are more likely to experience significantly
higher rates of emotional, behavioral, and immediate and long-term health problems… They may
also have numerous academic difficulties, including below-grade level reading, high rate of learning
12
disabilities, poor school attendance, and failure to advance to the next grade or graduate. 

16
families with complex needs and multiple systems involvement.” 
There has been an increase in the number of Vermont children
experiencing homelessness. The McKinney-Vento Homelessness
In 2022, FSH served 368 families with 693 children, compared to
Assistance Act defines homelessness as lacking a fixed, regular,
327 families with 608 children in 2021. The program continues
and adequate nighttime residence which includes sharing the
to serve 10 Agency of Human Services Districts with a maximum
16
housing of other persons, living in temporary housing, and places
capacity of 285 families at any point in time. 
13 
not designed for regular sleeping accommodation.
Children and
families meeting this definition are entitled to a number of services,
Emergency housing policies have been in flux since the onset of
resources, and supports from their Local Education Agency.
the COVID-19 pandemic as public health guidance has changed,
As can be seen in Figure 2, there has been a striking increase
funding sources have shifted, and the needs of Vermonters have
of Vermont children under 9 enrolled in school who meet
changed. The Vermont Emergency Rental Assistance Program
the McKinney-Vento definition of homelessness, from 247
(VERAP) was designed as a short-term initiative funded by
14
in 2020-2021 to 398 in 2021-2022.
the U.S. Treasury and served 12,613 households since April
17
2021, providing more than $138 million in rental assistance.
Figure 2 Students Under 9 Eligible for McKinney-Vento
An additional $40 million in remaining funds was recently
14
Homelessness Assistance
approved to provide services such as eviction counseling and
case management through 2025 and temporary continued
400
rental assistance for the most vulnerable Vermonters through
18
398
June 2023. 
300
337
Of those who have stable housing, the costs can be a significant
268
portion of their income, with typical housing expenses above
200
247
7
226
$15,000 per year for two working adults with two children.
Of all households in Vermont, 32% are cost-burdened by their rent
100
19 
or mortgage.
Vermont’s rental vacancy of 2.4% in 2021
20 
is the lowest in the country,
and finding any rental, let alone
0
an affordable, desirable rental can be extremely challenging
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
for families. Homeownership provides a path to building financial
assets for families and gives children a secure, stable housing
20
situation, but given the low homeowner vacancy rate of 0.6% 
Similarly, the Vermont Housing Coalition to End Homelessness’
2022 point-in-time count of those experiencing homelessness
in 2021 paired with soaring interest rates, many Vermont
shows the number of people in households with children under
families are finding homeownership increasingly out of reach.
18 increased by 130% from pre-pandemic levels, from 629 in
15 
2019 to 857 in 2022.
Of note, children identified in this count
The rental vacancy rate
may overlap with children enrolled in school as identified above.
in Vermont was just
Vermont supports homeless children and families through different
programs and resources, one of which is the Family Supportive
2.4% 
in 2021.
Housing program (FSH) through the Vermont Department for
Children and Families (DCF). FSH “provides intensive case
management and service coordination to homeless families
Housing-related policy recommendations from Vermont’s Early
with children, following evidence-based practice for housing
Childhood State Advisory Network can be found on page 4.

| 
2022 Year in Review 9
BASIC NEEDS

Reach Up
13,610 Vermont children under
Reach Up, Vermont’s Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
program, provides foundational support to help families meet
18 lived in households that were
basic needs like housing and transportation along with support
food insecure in 2020.
with overcoming obstacles and reaching their goals. Reach
Up has found two innovative ways to better support families
In 2020, 13,610, or approximately 12% of Vermont children
by reducing their administrative burden. First, Reach Up was
23
under age 18, lived in households that were food insecure.
able to use existing documentation of eligibility to distribute
This is a decrease from 14% in 2019. Households with
over $32 million of rental assistance (VERAP funds) to
incomes below 185% of the federal poverty level are likely
21 8 
over the last two years.Second, Reach Up is
eligible families.
eligible for federal nutrition programs. Of the 12% of children
shifting their case management model to a coaching framework
living in food-insecure households, 33% are likely ineligible
and working more holistically with the whole family. By 2024,
for federal nutrition programs like 3SquaresVT compared
the program will implement a “Universal Engagement” model,
23 
to 21% 
for the nation as a whole. As with many indicators,
which uses coaching and family-directed planning. This enables
food insecurity varies across the state, with the rate of children
families to pursue both short and longer term goals such as
living in food-insecure households ranging from 10.5% in
educational attainment, stable housing and employment in the
23
Grand Isle and Chittenden counties to 20.5% in Essex County 
way that enables them to be most successful given their individual
This data is for 2020 and does not account for inflation or
8 
The Reach Up caseload went from a high of
circumstances.
supply chain issues that have raised food prices in recent years,
5,145 cases in July 2016 to 3,017 in August 2021. However, since
likely exacerbating food insecurity in the state.
then it has begun to increase and as of October 2022, there were
21 
Since 2021, the maximum benefit for a family of
3,532 cases.
Breakfast and lunch provided to students during the school day
four in Chittenden County was $1,000 per month, an increase from
can mitigate food insecurity. Providing these meals to all students
8 
However, the benefit level is not
$867 after an adjustment in 2019.
and including food and nutrition education as part of the curriculum
automatically updated based on any measure of the cost of living
has been possible since March 2020 using the Universal School
and requires a legislative process, unlike the automatic adjustment
Meals model. Funding for Universal School Meals has been secured
to the Child Care Financial Assistance Program, which is tied to the
for the 2022-2023 school year while the legislature determines
federal poverty level.
the future of the program. 31,215 students, or 37.4%, were income
eligible for free or reduced lunch in Vermont as a state for the
2021-2022 school year—although there were large differences
Food Insecurity
across the state from 8% in the Mount Mansfield Unified Union
Children who live with food insecurity may struggle to pay
24
SD to 85% in the Rutland City SD.
attention and be successful in school and learning environments.
They may also face immediate and long-term risks to their physical
and mental health, including chronic disease, depression, suicide,
Some early care and education programs are eligible to participate in
nutritional deficiencies, and obesity. Food insecurity is defined as
the Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP) and are reimbursed
the limited or uncertain availability of nutritionally adequate and safe
for healthy food and snacks provided to enrolled children.
foods, or limited or uncertain ability to acquire acceptable foods in
As of March 2022, only 438 programs participated in CACFP
22 
25 
socially acceptable ways.
Typical annual food expenses for a
due to inequitable access and barriers.
(approximately 39%) 
7
family of two adults and two children are $11,464.
Programs can provide meals through alternative means.

| 
10 The State of Vermont's Children
Two additional efforts to address food security in Vermont include  Two innovative efforts to address transportation challenges
3SquaresVT and WIC. 3SquaresVT, Vermont’s Supplemental  have recently been piloted. Green Mountain Transit is offering
30 
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), served 22,001 children  fare-free buses until at least fiscal year 2023. The Champlain
26 
Since the start of the
under age 18 in October of 2022.              Valley Office of Economic Opportunity has funded (through the
COVID-19 pandemic, Vermont has issued emergency allotments
Vermont Early Childhood Fund) a pilot transportation program
to eligible households – effectively ensuring that every household
in Franklin and Grand Isle counties for financial assistance
31 
receiving 3SquaresVT is receiving the maximum benefit allowed.                    Addressing the burden
with vehicle repairs and gas cards. 
In September 2022, this allotment resulted in an average benefit  of accessible, affordable transportation options is essential in our
2 
for a household of three of $658. The WIC program served an  rural state so children can reach the resources they need to thrive.
28 
average of 11,153 participants during FY22. Despite a sharp
increase in participation at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic,
Connectivity
participation has returned to 2019 levels. In June 2021, the fruit
and vegetable cash value benefit tripled in value for participants
Only 30% of Vermont's buildings have
as a result of ARPA funding. In the year prior to this change,
access to 100/100 speed internet.
$768,406 of WIC benefits were used for fruits and vegetables
compared to $2,251,010 after the change, a 193% increase.
Another long-standing challenge for Vermonters is digital
While the specific amounts have shifted, they remain well above
connectivity. While a lack of high-speed internet was previously a
the pre-pandemic monthly benefit amounts of $9 per child and $11
28
hardship, connectivity is now a necessity. According to the Vermont
per woman.
Department of Public Service based on data from Vermont internet
service providers, 82.5% of building locations in Vermont are
served with speeds of at least 25/3 (25 Mbps download and
63% of children who live in poverty
32
3 Mbps upload), while only 30.3% have access to 100/100.
in Vermont are in rural areas
For context, 25/3 is only fast enough for one virtual meeting with
video if there are no other devices running. Broadband access
across the state varies and is largely aligned with population
32
density, with higher density areas having higher levels of access. 

Transportation
The typical transportation expense for a two adult, two child
7 
household in Vermont is $11,565, or 42% of the FPL.In Vermont,
63% of children under 6 living in households with incomes
below the FPL live in rural areas where having a vehicle is critical
to access basic goods and services, as well as to get to work
29
and school.

| 
2022 Year in Review 11
RESILIENT FAMILIES & COMMUNITIES

RESILIENT FAMILIES & COMMUNITIES
A child’s sense of who they are and how to interact with the world depends on the quality and
stability of their relationships with their family and community.

Measuring Toxic Stress and Resilience
Toxic Stress and Resilience
Toxic stress and resilience are closely tied and are also difficult
Living in strong families within supportive communities provides
to measure. Positive childhood experiences are protective
the foundation for long-term child health and well-being and the
against future depression and poor mental health and support
ability to overcome adversity. When children experience trauma
3 
adult relational health.
Below are two indicators from the
and toxic stress in their early years, it can negatively impact their
National Survey of Children’s Health from 2020-2021 that Vermont
current and long-term physical and mental health if not buffered
is currently using to inform policy and practice.
by nurturing and supportive relationships.

The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) score is one of the
Figure 3 The Strengthening Families Approach –
most common indicators used to measure exposure to toxic
1
5 Protective Factors
stress and childhood adversity. In Vermont, 18.6% of children
Enhancing
under age 12 have had two or more adverse childhood
parental resilience
4 
experiences
(see Figure 4). The four most common ACEs for
Vermont children under 12 are: experiencing divorce of a parent
or guardian (19.8%), living in a home where it is hard to cover basic
Providing an                    Providing parents
needs (12.3%), living with someone with substance use disorder
array of social                    concrete resources
connections                    in times of need
(11.3%), and living with someone who has a serious mental
4 
health challenge (11%).
Of note, this measure fails to account
for factors which mitigate or exacerbate toxic stress, which are
important factors in how trauma or adversity is experienced.
Supporting healthy social
Facilitating knowledge
& emotional development
of parenting & child
in young children
development
Figure 4 Adverse Childhood Experiences for Children
4
Under 12 
18.5%
Vermont’s Frameworks for Supporting Families
and Communities
None
Vermont’s early childhood system prioritizes prevention and
15.6%
intervention to support children and families as early as possible.
One
Examples of Vermont’s commitment to prevention and building
65.8%
Two or more 
family resilience include adopting the Strengthening Families
Approach (see Figure 3) and the Vermont Guiding Principles.
The Strengthening Families Approach is based on five protective
The Flourishing indicator measures characteristics of children that
factors “to increase family strengths, enhance child development
are associated with resilience. Parents and caregivers are asked
1 
Aligned
and reduce the likelihood of child abuse and neglect.” 
whether their young children (6 months to 5 years) 1. are affectionate
with the Strengthening Families Framework are the Vermont
and tender, 2. bounce back quickly when things don’t go their way, 3.
Guiding Principles, which support each and every young child and
show interest and curiosity in learning new things, and 4. smile and
family’s full and equitable participation in communities, services,
laugh a lot. Of Vermont’s children 6 months to 5 years, 87% exhibit
and supports. The Vermont Guiding Principles describe what
4 
all four flourishing characteristics.
For older children, there are
individuals, organizations, and communities understand and do to
three items in the measure and 56% of Vermont children ages
realize the promise of each and every young Vermont child.
4
6 through 11 meet all three items.
They highlight explicit, intentional, and strengths-based practices
that are respectful of and responsive to child, family,
2 
As toxic stress
and community values, priorities, and beliefs.
87% of Vermont's children 6 months
and positive childhood experiences are increasingly recognized
to 5 years exhibit all four flourishing
for their significant effects, Vermont can build on these
characteristics associated with resilience
foundations to improve family and community resilience.

| 
12 The State of Vermont's Children


VECAP GOAL 2 :ALL FAMILIES &
COMMUNITIES PLAY A LEADING
ROLE IN CHILDREN’S WELL-BEING

The second indicator of child and family safety is the number of
Child and Family Safety
children in protective custody. When a child’s safety is threatened,
Below are two sets of indicators of child and family safety
the Department for Children and Families (DCF)-Family Services
provided by the organizations and agencies in Vermont
Division (FSD) becomes involved. In 2022, 19,274 child abuse and
providing services. The first indicator of child safety is the
neglect intakes (calls to the child protection hotline) resulted
number of Vermont children receiving supports due to
6 
in 2,206 assessments and 2,349 investigations.
The result of
exposure to domestic violence. In 2022, 1,563 children and
these interventions may include ongoing DCF involvement in
youth connected with one of the 15 member organizations of
one of the following types of cases: DCF custody, family support,
the Vermont Network Against Domestic and Sexual Violence
or conditional custody, as seen in Table 3.
for help related to abuse toward a family member or toward
themselves. These organizations also supported 196 children
5
The number of children under age 9 in protective custody on
impacted by child sexual abuse.
7 
September 30, 2022, was 541.
As can be seen in Figure 5,
the number has remained relatively stable over the past three
7
years after an increase between 2015 and 2019. The Department
Table 3 Cases by Type of DCF Involvement
for Children and Families- Family Services Division is committed
to preventive approaches and is executing a five-year Title IV-E
Prevention Plan which includes the implementation of two
DCF Protective Custody: The child is
evidence-based prevention services: Parent Child Interaction
1,087
placed with a relative or foster family
8
Therapy (PCIT) and Motivational Interviewing. 

7
Figure 5 Children Under 9 in DCF Protective Custody by Age
Family Support: DCF provides support to
2 0 2 2
families without court involvement
189


I N
Total under 9
0 to 2 3 to 5 6 to 8


Conditional Custody: The child is in the
800
721
custody of a parent or relative with DCF supervision
C A S E S
508
659
695
657 
and services to ensure the child’s safety
618 
198
541 541
520 
509
600
178
174
172
170
Data Note: Custody Cases and Conditional Custody cases are reflective of
152
a child count, whereas the Family Support Cases is a family count. Includes
129
240
146
117
251
children of all ages.
235
228
200
400
181
175
154
152
283
270
257
Additionally, these member organizations supported housing
248
246
200
238
237
223
for those children likely impacted by domestic violence. Shelters
208
housed 191 children (109 of whom were under age 7); motels
and safe homes sheltered 233 children (119 under age 7); and
2020    2022
2018 
2014 2016
5
transitional housing sheltered 57 children in 2022 
.



Resilience:The capacity to thrive, individually and collectively, in the face of adversity.

| 
2022 Year in Review 13
HEALTH & WELL-BEING

HEALTH & WELL-BEING
Healthy child development depends on a
child’s early experiences and environmental
factors such as access to health care and
support from pregnancy onward, as well
as Social Determinants of Health.

Vermont emphasizes well-child visits: routine healthcare visits
Social Determinants of Health
held when the child is healthy, which allow the provider and parent
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
to focus on a child’s wellness and development, preventing future
(CDC), “Social determinants of health (SDOH) are conditions in
health problems as well as encouraging families to access care
the places where people live, learn, work, and play that affect
1 
when a child is sick or injured. Of children under age 9, 91% had
a wide range of health risks and outcomes. 
Vermont’s holistic
seen a healthcare provider at least once during the last year for
approach to early childhood well-being recognizes that we all
2
any kind of medical care. 
have a role to play in ensuring the health of our children by
improving these social factors. Strategies like integrating food
Vermont also recognizes the importance of oral health for very
security screenings into well-child and prenatal health visits,
young children. Efforts to increase preventive dental care visits
and innovative programs like Developmental Understanding
for 1- and 2-year-old children have been successful with an
and Legal Collaboration for Everyone (DULCE) that place
2 
increase from 28.6% in 2018 to 34.3% in 2021. 
As can be seen
social support workers in primary care practices, help lay the
in Figure 6, Vermont children ages 3 to 8 regularly see the dentist
foundation for healthy development.
2
for preventive care. 
Health Access
Vermont children have some of the best access to healthcare
Immunizations
in the U.S., with 97% percent of children under age 9 having
2 
some type of health insurance at the time of the survey. 
Of
families with children under 5, 78% reported that insurance for
3 
75% of Vermont children
their children was adequate in 2021. 
This is down 4 percentage
points from 2018, primarily due to the increase in out-of-pocket
received their recommended
3
costs associated with health care. 
immunizations by age 2
in 2021.
Figure 6 Children Ages 1-8 with at Least One Preventive
2
Dental Visit in the Past 12 Months 

Another measure of health and well-being for young children
is the rate of immunization. Receiving the full series
92%
of recommended immunizations shields children against
82%
14 preventable diseases. Vaccinations also help protect
vulnerable people from the risk of disease, especially infants
who are too young to be vaccinated, and children
4 
and adults whose immune systems are weaker. 
In 2021,
three-quarters (75%) of Vermont children received their
5 
34%
recommended immunizations by age 2,
compared to 70%
6 
in the total United States. 
However, rates differed
1 to 2 YRS   3 to 5 YRS   6 to 8 YRS
by county from a high of 86% in Rutland County to a low of
5
46% in Essex County. 

| 
14 The State of Vermont's Children
VECAP GOAL 1 :
ALL CHILDREN HAVE
A HEALTHY START

9
Figure 7 Substance Use During Pregnancy (2020 Births)
Pre and Postnatal Health
The foundation of child and family health starts before birth.
The period during and immediately following pregnancy
CIGARETTE
ALCOHOL 
is a key time for a child’s long-term development and the
SMOKING
well-being of both the birthing parent and child.

11% 11%
Breastfeeding
Breastfeeding helps prevent obesity and diabetes in children,
and puts birthing parents at lower risk for breast and ovarian
cancer, diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease.
MARIJUANA 
MEDICATION
Across the board, when compared to the whole U.S.,
ASSISTED
Vermont has higher rates of breastfeeding initiation
TREATMENT
(91.8% vs. 83.2%), exclusive breastfeeding through 6 months
5%
11% 
(36.2% vs. 24.9%), sustained breastfeeding through 12 months
(54% vs. 35.9%), and lower rates of infants receiving formula
before two days of age (9.5% vs. 19.2%) among infants born
7
in 2019. 
Prenatal Substance Use
Health Care Visits
Supporting the reduction of a birthing parent’s use of harmful
8 
Of the 5,127 Vermont babies born in 2020,85% of birthing
substances during pregnancy has been one of Vermont’s
parents had adequate prenatal care (early entry and regular visits),
key public health initiatives in recent years. This includes
and 90% had a postpartum visit. Of birthing parents, 77% had
alcohol, cigarettes, marijuana, and other substance use during
a visit with a healthcare provider in the year before pregnancy.
pregnancy. When substances are used during pregnancy, there
However, only 30% of birthing parents discussed getting
can be lifelong effects on the child’s ability to thrive. As can
pregnant at this visit. Of births in 2020, 32% resulted from
be seen in Figure 7, alcohol, cigarettes, and marijuana were
9
unintended pregnancies. 
the most commonly used substances during pregnancy at
11% each. Medication Assisted Treatment (MAT) was utilized
9
by 5% of birthing parents during pregnancy. 
85% of birthing parents
In 2020, Vermont’s rate of infants born with a diagnosis of drug
had adequate prenatal
10 
withdrawal syndrome was 17.8 per 1,000 live birth. 
This is down
care in 2020.
from 24 per 1,000 live births in 2018 and significantly decreased
10 
from a peak of 35.7 per 1,000 live births in 2014.
Vermont is
committed to ongoing systems of care for screening and diagnosis
of substance use disorder in pregnancy, and communities are
working together to provide treatment and supportive care for
impacted individuals and their families.

| 
2022 Year in Review 15
HEALTH & WELL-BEING

MENTAL HEALTH FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES
There is no health without mental health.

For children and families, mental health refers to social, emotional, and behavioral well-being, and includes the capacity to
regulate and express emotion; form close, secure relationships; and explore and learn from the environment. Healthy social
and emotional development and access to services, resources, and supports allow children to develop the resilience to ensure that
stress is tolerable rather than toxic and to grow into well-rounded, healthy adults. Toxic stress without such supports can have
lifelong impacts on the ability to develop peer relationships, learn, and thrive.

Mental Health Services for Children in Vermont
Children with one or more behavioral, emotional, or mental health conditions and their families often require additional services, resources,
and supports. Vermont’s mental health system has multiple levels of supports and services.

Community-based services and supports include home-based services, school-based services, Intensive Family Based Services, respite
supports, and access to Coordinated Services Plans. Although not available throughout Vermont, two promising evidence-based pilot
programs have been successful in providing time-sensitive care for children: Mobile Response and Stabilization Services in Rutland,
and Psychiatric Urgent Care for Kids (PUCK) in Bennington.

Community-Based
Crisis Case Management
Residential Treatement
Outpatient Services
Inpatient Care 
Services & Supports
& Placements 

The Need for Behavioral, Emotional, and Mental   Service Utilization
Routine mental health services provided by Vermont’s 12
Health Services in Vermont Children Under 9
Designated Mental Health Agencies (DAs) are a primary
There is ample quantitative and qualitative evidence that the
prevention strategy for higher acuity services. As depicted
need for children’s mental health services is increasing, both in
through the bars in Figure 9, the number of children served by
the number of children requiring services, and the acuity of
DAs over the past six years has ranged from a high of 3,322
those needs.
in 2021 to a low of 2,910 (-412) in 2022, the lowest since 2012
Figure 8 Percent of Children Ages 3 - 8 in Vermont and the
despite the increased need for mental health services
US with a Behavioral Health Condition, Conduct Problems,
11 
noted above. 
DAs also provide crisis services for those
2
Anxiety, and / or Depression 
children needing immediate care. As can be seen in the
light blue line, from 2021 to 2022, the number of children
Vermont   US
accessing these crisis services increased by 62, from 198
11 
to 262. 
When the two indicators are taken together, the
data shows that when there are fewer children receiving
routine services through DAs (2019 and 2022), the number
13.8%
of children accessing crisis services is higher. Of note,
these indicators do not capture the current need for
8.7% 
either service, only utilization of services.
8.0%
7.9%
Boarding in Emergency Departments
Children boarding in emergency departments (EDs) while waiting
2019-2021
2016-2018
for mental health resources has been a long-standing challenge
in Vermont. In 2019, there were over 1,500 discharges from
As can be seen in Figure 8, between 2018 and 2021, the rate
emergency departments for children with a primary mental
of children with behavioral/conduct problems, anxiety, and/
health diagnosis, with 16% of those children waiting 2 or
12 
or depression in Vermont rose from 8.7 to 13.8% for children
more days for placement. 
In response to increasing numbers
2
ages 3 to 8, while overall U.S. rates remained stable at 8%. 
of children boarding in EDs during the COVID-19 response,

| 
16 
The State of Vermont's Children
| 
16 The State of Vermont's Children
consider out-of-home treatment such as a community-based
the Vermont Association of Hospitals and Health Systems
therapeutic foster home, small group home, or residential
began collecting point-in-time data on people waiting for
treatment program. Vermont currently has the lowest number
mental health placement in emergency departments. Though
13
of out-of-home treatment beds in over two decades. 
the average number of children under 18 waiting in EDs for
mental health placement has decreased from a high of 15 in
In addition to full program closures, some programs have had
January 2022 to 6 in October, over 50% of those children still
to temporarily close beds or shift from seven to five days of
12 
end up boarding in EDs for more than 24 hours. 
operations per week. These closures, bed reductions, and reduced
The need for
days are due to staffing shortages, and are compounded
beds and wait times tends to be most acute in the fall, and can
by fiscal concerns specific to the unsustainable funding
be affected by lack of transportation, outpatient resources,
methodology for Private Non-Medical Institutions (PNMI).
staffing shortages, patient acuity, and bed availability.
In 2022, out of the 229 children ages 21 and younger in
Figure 9 Children Under 9 Utilizing Mental Health Services
licensed residential treatment programs, 22 children (9.6%)
11
Through Designated Mental Health Agencies 
were under the age of 9. Since 2021, the total number of children
13 
under age 21 has decreased by 120 children.
This reduction
is more likely due to a decrease in availability of openings in
Routine Services Crisis Services
programs in Vermont and other states due to COVID-19 pandemic
impacts on staffing and virus mitigation efforts, rather than due to
4,000
265
300
262
227   227 198
a reduction in need for that level of care.
197 


3,000
Mental Health Workforce
200
2,000
There are a number of factors that impact utilization of services,
3,322
3,322
including the mental health workforce. The total number of
3,138
3,171
100
2,967
2,910
1,000
# served by DAs
positions at DAs and Specialized Service Agencies (SSAs)
varies based on grant funding and special projects. In October
# accessing crisis services
0
0
2022, the vacancy rate for DAs and Specialized Service
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
11
Agencies was 1,077 out of approximately 5,943 positions (18.1%).

Vacancy rate for DAs and
Residential Treatment
For some children, community-based supports may not be
Specialized Service Agencies
18%
adequate to effectively address the clinical needs of the child
positions in October 2022
and family. In these instances, the family and support team may

FEDERAL POLICY CONSIDERATION
Two critical federal resources that build Vermont’s capacity to meet mental health needs cannot be used
for prevention and promotion of mental health activities: Medicaid and the Mental Health Block Grant.
Medicaid requires a diagnosis for services and the Mental Health Block Grant can only be used for adults
with Severe Mental Illness and youth with Severe Emotional Disturbance. As children and families are
facing new and compounded challenges from the ripple effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, funding for
upstream prevention and promotion services is essential to Vermont’s ability to turn the curve on wellness.

| 
| 
2022 Year in Review 17
2022 Year in Review 17
CHILD DEVELOPMENT & EDUCATION

CHILD DEVELOPMENT
& EDUCATION
What resources, services, and supports
are available in Vermont? Are they easy
to access and navigate? How many
VECAP GOAL 3 : ACCESS TO HIGH QUALITY
children are enrolled?
EARLY CHILDHOOD SERVICES & SUPPORTS

Vermont’s early childhood system includes many resources,  Developmental screening is a whole-population strategy designed
services, and supports to give children the best opportunity to  to help families better understand children’s early development,
succeed throughout their lives. Starting during pregnancy and  celebrate milestones, and identify concerns so that children get
extending through age 8, the system meets child and family needs  connected to the services they need at an early age, when the
through creative and diverse programs. These programs can,  benefits are the greatest. Data from Vermont’s statewide medical
at times, be difficult to navigate, but Vermont continues to improve  home initiative, the Blueprint for Health, show that the percentage
equitable access and transitions between programs and services.  of Vermont children under age 3 who received a developmental
screening in the past 12 months decreased slightly from 58%
1 
in 2019 to 56% in 2020. 
Developmental Screening                            Of note, this indicator does not capture
all screening activities. As can be seen in Figure 10, regional
Figure 10 Percent of Children 3 and Under Who Received
rates vary from 72% in Middlebury to 19% in Newport. Efforts to
a Developmental Screening in the Past 12 Months by
increase the use of developmental screenings and identification
1
include the Universal Developmental Screening Registry, launched
Hospital Service (2020) 
in 2014, and more recently, the Ages and Stages Questionnaire
(ASQ) Online Platform hosted by Help Me Grow Vermont, which
logged or supported 4,093 ASQ-3 and ASQ:SE (social-emotional)
72%
2
71%
screens in 2021. 
67%
64%
58%
Parent Child Center Network
56%
55%
54%
50%
The network of 15 Parent Child Centers (PCC) serves all of
49%
48%
44%
43%
Vermont with a focus on early identification, intervention, and
prevention through eight core services: parent education, parent
support, home visits, early childhood services, concrete family
supports, playgroups, community development, and information
19%
and referral. From July 2021 to June 2022, over 50,000
3 
participants were served across all 15 PCC programs. 
Over 90%
of parents receiving supports from Parent Child Centers when
MiddleburyBurlingtonSt. AlbansRandolphSpringfieldBenningtonBattleboroRutlandMorrisvilleSt. JohnsburyBarreWhite River Jct.NewportState of Vermont
surveyed reported that they got the help they needed, and that
3
they feel stronger and more confident as parents.

| 
18 The State of Vermont's Children
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) Services from Birth through Age 8
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is a law that ensures access to special education and related services to eligible children
with disabilities. Infants and toddlers (birth through age 2) with disabilities and their families receive early intervention Under IDEA Part C. Children and
4
youth ages 3 through 21 receive special education and related services under DEA Part B.

6
IDEA Part C: Early Intervention
Table 4 Children Receiving Special Education Services 
In Vermont, IDEA Part C Early Intervention (EI) is provided
Age    IEP 504 EST
through Children’s Integrated Services (CIS). CIS-EI includes
3      370
13
***
a broad array of services such as developmental education,
speech and language therapy, physical therapy, and occupational
4      561
20
***
therapy. CIS-EI, like all human services in Vermont, has seen
5      780
126
44
a recent increase in the need for services, as well as a greater
6      818
279
85
desire from families to engage in services. As a result,
the proportion of referrals resulting in individualized services has
7      942
420
115
risen above pre-pandemic levels. Between December 2, 2020,
8     1,008
432
185
and December 1, 2021, 81.2% of EI referrals resulted in an
Total    4,479
1,290
429
initial One Plan, Vermont’s Individualized Family Services
Plan (IFSP). During this same time frame, 2,002 children
Children’s Integrated Services (CIS)
5
under 3 received CIS-EI services. 
CIS is designed to wrap around the whole family to help ensure the
healthy development and well-being of children from before birth to
age 5. CIS offers four core services to families of young children facing
IDEA Part B: Early Childhood Special Education Services
challenges: Early Intervention (IDEA Part C), Specialized Child Care,
Early Childhood Special Education Services (ECSE) supports
Early Childhood and Family Mental Health (ECFMH), and Strong
children ages 3 to 6 years with special education extending
Families Vermont Home Visiting. During FFY 2022, CIS served a
to age 22. Individualized education plans (IEP) are developed
7 
total of 3,896 unique clients with at least one service.
Because of
and implemented to ensure a child’s right to a Free and
the different ways services are funded across the state, this count
Appropriate Public Education (FAPE) under IDEA. As can be seen in
includes clients receiving at least one of the four CIS services in 9 out of
Table 4, during the 2021-2022 school year, 4,479 students
11 regions, but only Early Intervention in the St. Albans and
ages 3 through 8 received services through an individualized
Middlebury regions. Of note, the regional fiscal agents’ submission
education plan (IEP), 429 received services under a 504 plan,
of a claim for each CIS encounter is only in its second year and
and 1,290 received services from an educational support
continues to grow to reflect all the services and supports provided
6
team (EST). 
through CIS. This total, therefore, is likely an undercount.

Early Childhood Care and Education
Vermont’s early care and education system is considered a “mixed delivery system,” meaning it consists of a mix of programs that serve children
6 weeks to 5 years old and not yet in kindergarten, including licensed and registered family child care programs, center-based programs,
8 
This mixed-delivery approach applies to the state’s Universal Prekindergarten Education system as well,
and school-based programs.
9
is considered a national best practice, and is a requirement for several federal grants.

Figure 11 Enrollment in Regulated Child Care Programs
As of December 2021, there were 16,381 children enrolled in
10
regulated early childhood education programs. Figure 11 shows
(2021 - 2022) 
that the vast majority (85%) of children were enrolled in center-
Licensed Family
Registered Family
Center Based
Child Care
Child Care
Child Care
based child care programs, followed by registered family child care
programs (13%), with less than 2% of children enrolled in licensed
10,000
10 
This includes children enrolled in private
family child care programs.
Universal Prekindergarten Education (UPK) programs Act 166 but
7,400
does not include those enrolled in school-based UPK programs.
9,684
This supply of regulated child care is not meeting the need. As of 2022,
5,000
of those likely to need care, 76% of infants do not have access to
2,291
1,924
regulated programs that are deemed high-quality (4 or 5 star),
2,500
while 54% of toddlers and 52% of preschoolers do not have access
1,045
577
597
11 
162
According to Let’s Grow Kids, to meet the
to high-quality programs.
51
50
0
estimated child care demand for working parents, the child care system
Infants
Toddlers    Preschoolers
11
in Vermont would need to add almost 9,000 new child care slots.

| 
2022 Year in Review 19
CHILD DEVELOPMENT & EDUCATION

According to data from the Bright Futures Information System
Exclusionary Discipline (Suspension and Expulsion)
15
(BFIS), in December 2021, there were 7,016 unduplicated
The 2021 passage of Act 35,
individuals working in regulated child care settings, in positions
which prohibits exclusionary
working with children. This is down 16% from 8,345 in December
discipline (broadly defined as
12 
of 2018. 
Data from the new Child Development Division
suspension and expulsion)
Information System (CDDIS) show that there were 5,446 children
for children under age 8,
whose families received support through the Child Care Financial
has led to an increase in
Assistance Program (CCFAP) as of September 30, 2022, with
attention to the use of
12
3,547 children (65%) being under the age of 5.
exclusionary discipline as
well as prevention and
Head Start and Early Head Start
mitigation strategies in early
Head Start and Early Head Start (HS/EHS) are comprehensive early
childhood settings. Data for
education programs for children from low-income and vulnerable
children ages 5 through 8
families from birth to age 5. In addition to helping children prepare
across school years 2018
for kindergarten and beyond, HS/EHS help facilitate critical
and 2021 show that there are
health services, like immunizations and vision, dental, and hearing
disproportionate impacts
screenings, in addition to providing other wraparound support
on two vulnerable student groups: students eligible for free and
services for families. From September 2021 to August 2022,
reduced lunch, who make up 35% of the student population but
Vermont Head Start served 787 children from age 3 to 5,
account for an average of 72% of suspensions; and children
and Early Head Start served 536 infants and toddlers and 37
receiving special education services through an Individualized
13
prenatal birthing parents, for a total of 1,360 individuals. 
Education Plan (IEP), who make up 15% of the student population
For program year 2022, there were 547 staff in HS/EHS
but account for 36% of suspensions. In addition, historically
programs. Of all staff, 17% (95) left during the program year,
marginalized students make up an average of 82% of suspensions
16 
with 38 vacancies remaining unfilled for a period of three
among children ages 5 through 8.
In 2022, Building Bright Futures
13 
months or longer. 
These high rates of turnover and vacancy
produced the first-ever data brief containing this data. The full
make it difficult to provide consistent and high-quality services to
brief is available at vermontkidsdata.org/exclusionary-discipline-brief.
particularly vulnerable children and families.
Afterschool and Out-of-School Time Care (Third Space)
Universal Prekindergarten Education
According to the Afterschool Alliance, in 2020, there were 19,092
Act 166 offers Universal Prekindergarten Education (UPK) to all
children in afterschool programs in Vermont. However, the Alliance
3- and 4-year-olds, and to 5-year-olds not enrolled in Kindergarten,
found that over 26,148, or 39%, of Vermont’s children would
for up to 10 hours a week of publicly-funded prekindergarten
participate in an afterschool program if one were available
17 
education for 35 weeks of the academic year. Vermont’s mixed-
to them. 
The Vermont Interagency Afterschool Youth Task
delivery system means that these hours can be used in school-
Force is working to develop a publicly funded universal statewide
based programs or in prequalified prekindergarten center-based child
system of safe, enriching, and comprehensive third-space options
18 
care and family child care programs. As can be seen in Figure 12,
for Vermont’s youth from kindergarten through high school. 
In
UPK enrollment dropped to 6,904 during the 2020-2021
the meantime, Vermont is already investing in expanding current
school year, but has since rebounded to 7,541, although it
third-space programs and starting new ones. In summer 2022, the
14
is not back to pre-pandemic levels.
Expanding Access grant invested $912,716 to support 1,234 new
afterschool slots, with 388 added days, serving 6,468 children.
Figure 12 Universal Prekindergarten Education Enrollment
As of November 2022, current grant investment for fall 2022
14
by School Year
19
through summer 2023 was $4.23 million. 
8,807 
8,841
8,598 
8,115 
8000
7,541
7,301 
6,904 
Educational Assessments
6,214 
Vermont currently reports on three primary assessments to measure
6000
children’s knowledge, skills, and behaviors: Teaching Strategies Gold
(TSGold), the Agency of Education’s Ready for Kindergarten! Survey
4000
(R4K!S), and Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium (SBAC)
Third Grade Language Arts (reading) and Math. Below are overviews
of fall 2021 R4K!S and spring 2021 SBAC assessments, also available
2000
by Supervisory Union/School District in the Regional Profiles starting
on page 23. TSGold assessments were not conducted in the Spring
2018 2020 2022
2016
of 2020, and data from subsequent assessments is not yet available.

| 
20 The State of Vermont's Children
21 
results to any prior year’s results.”
We look forward to publishing TSGold data in future reports and                  Additionally, starting in Spring
on Vermontkidsdata.org.                    2023, SBAC assessments will be replaced with Cognia assessments
for English Language Arts and Math. The Cognia tool emphasizes
equity, diversity, and inclusion and features accommodations for
Ready for Kindergarten! Survey
22
enhanced accessibility.
Vermont uses the Ready for Kindergarten! Survey (R4K!S) to assess
students’ knowledge and skills within the first six to 10 weeks of school.
At the end of third grade, Vermont students are assessed on their
Teachers assess students on 34 items across the following domains:
proficiency in reading and math. As can be seen in Figure 13,
Physical Development and Health, Social and Emotional Development,
proficiency rates from the 2020-2021 school year vary based
Approaches to Learning, Communication, and Cognitive Development.
on economic status, race, and homelessness, culminating in a
In the Fall of 2021, 85% of students were identified as ready
comparison between historically marginalized and historically
for kindergarten. Children living in households who were income-
advantaged students. For “historically marginalized” students,
eligible for free and reduced lunch were less likely to be identified
27% are proficient or above in both reading and math, while
as ready for kindergarten (74%) compared to children from higher-
20 
the rates for “historically advantaged” students are 59% and
income households (91%).
There has not been noteworthy change
21
57% respectively. 
since 2015 in the percent of children identified as ready for kindergarten.

In addition to variations in proficiency based on individual student
Third Grade Math and Language Arts Assessments
characteristics, there are large variations across the state. The percent
While statewide Third Grade Language Arts and Math assessment
of students proficient or above in third grade reading ranges from
data are presented below, the Vermont Agency of Education is clear
a low of 16% in the Two Rivers Supervisory Union to 71% in the
that “because test administration during 2020-2021 was impacted
21
Champlain Valley School District.
by several, novel variables, we discourage comparing 2020-2021

Figure 13 Percent of Third Graders Proficient or Above in Reading & Math Assessments
21
by Characteristics Spring 2021 
Math
Reading 

59% 
57%
51%
53% 
49% 
48%
43% 
43% 
42% 41%
41%                           42%                42% 
41%

30% 
30%
28% 
27% 27%
24%
24%
24% 

13%
13% 
11% 
10%

White ELL Not ELL McKinneyNot McKinney HistoricallyHistorically
FRL Not FRL Eli Special Ed No Special   Black
All Students
Vento  Vento  Marginalized Advantaged
Eligable Ed 
Eligible Eligible

| 
2022 Year in Review 21
2022 EARLY CHILDHOOD
FAMILY NEEDS
ASSESSMENT PREVIEW

via Sur veyMonkey; therefore, the findings may not be fully
This spotlight elevates the work and expertise of the VECAP
representative of the experiences of families with young
Families and Communities Committee in fielding 2022’s
children in Vermont.
Early Childhood Family Needs Assessment and provides a
preliminary look at the Assessment’s findings. The 2022 Early
Childhood Family Needs Assessment Report will be released
The Team Behind the Survey
in early 2023, and the Families and Communities Committee
The parent leader co-chairs of the Families and Communities
and the larger Building Bright Futures Network will promote the
Committee led the iterative survey design, drafting,
use of this important source of data and information widely
and editing process in the spring and summer of 2022.
with policy- and decision-makers across Vermont.
Throughout the process, the team reviewed numerous drafts
with the Committee, which is made up of a majority of parents
Overview
and primary caregivers. The survey’s design was based on
Developed and fielded in 2022, the Early Childhood Family
Committee members’ user experience and understanding of the
Needs Assessment aimed to collect information and stories
early childhood system and the families in their communities.
about the barriers Vermont families with children under age 9
In addition to the Committee, the team also consulted with
face when accessing services related to the early childhood
a variety of public and private partners who were sent drafts
period in their communities. The assessment is a project of
of the survey for review.
the Families and Communities Committee, which leads the
process of developing a survey, engaging in outreach, and
Preliminary Findings
overseeing the production of an Early Childhood Family Needs
There were 654 total responses to the Family Needs
Assessments report on a regular basis. Between mid-August
Assessment survey. Chittenden County had the most
and mid-October of 2022, the survey was circulated widely
responses at 124, followed by Bennington (70), Franklin
throughout the state, resulting in 654 responses. Respondents
(63), and Orleans (63). The county with the lowest response
were asked about their experiences with accessing
rate was Essex. There were 1,104 total children under 18
resources and supports like child care, early intervention
represented in the survey, with ages ranging from less than
services, healthy food, and pediatric care. The survey asked
a year to 9+ years, with 3 years old being the most common age.
primary caregivers to rate a variety of experiences with early
childhood settings, including to indicate how welcomed
Of the respondents, 88.3% were white, followed by Two or
they felt in a given setting, whether they felt their family’s
More Races (3.2%), Black or African American (2.1%) and Asian
culture and values were respected, and whether they had the
(2.1%), with the remainder identifying as American Indian or
access and tools to communicate their family’s needs to the
Alaska Native, or Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander,
setting’s staff.
or Another Race. 2% of respondents preferred not to answer.
Figure 14
These questions were designed to better understand
the challenges Vermont families face when accessing
87% of 434 respondents
services; this is data the Committee considers essential
to informing important policy and implementation
agreed with "I was able to
decisions in Vermont as stakeholders aim to better
access needed services,
integrate the early childhood system. Of note,
resources, or support for
respondents self-selected to participate in this survey,
my children and / or family."
and the vast majority of the responses were recorded

| 
22 The State of Vermont's Children
Figure 15 Percent of Needs Assessment Respondents with a Positive Experience by Service Type

91% 
88% 
83% 83% 
77% 
71%

Publicly Funded
Child Care /
Town or Community
School (K-3) 
CIS Head Start 
Resource 
Pre-K 
Early Learning Settings

As can be seen in Figure 14, the overall response to accessibility
Next Steps
of early childhood services was positive. Of the 434 respondents
The Family Needs Assessment aims to elevate families’ stories
who answered the statement, “I was able to access needed
about positive and negative experiences with accessing
services, resources, or support for my child(ren) and / or family,”
early childhood services, including medical care, CIS,
87% agreed. The team will conduct a more thorough analysis of
and community and school programs. For the final report
responses for those who disagreed to determine how Vermont can
in early 2023, responses for each service will be analyzed
better support families.
according to several factors, including location, equity,
and types of programs and services.
Respondents were invited to provide their perspective on
the challenges and successes they had experienced with up
to three early childhood services or supports. In addition,
the survey asked about the respondents’ experience with six
early childhood services that are available or offered to Vermont
families. Respondents were asked to rate their agreement
with the following statement, “My experience with each of the
following services/supports was overall positive.” As can be
seen in Figure 15, across all services, respondents generally
reported a positive experience.

The survey also inquired about basic needs, including housing,
transportation, food, and family needs such as diapers,
Jen Fortman and Sarah Morrison, the family co-chairs
and whether or not those needs were met. Ninety-one
of the Families and Communities Committee led the Family
percent of respondents agreed in some form that they
Needs Assessment process, including circulating
had access to safe, secure, and affordable housing.
hundreds of paper surveys and recruitment
The other categories of basic needs will be analyzed when
materials across the state.
the final analysis is done in early 2023.

| 
2022 Year in Review 23
REGIONAL PROFILES

ABOUT REGIONAL COUNCILS
Building Bright Futures’ Regional Councils bring together early childhood stakeholders to identify gaps, share expertise and resources,
elevate regional and family voices, and implement strategies in each respective region. These strategies include identifying gaps for
children and families and aiming to improve access to services and supports across early care, health, and education for young children
and families in their communities. Regional Council members are crucial to each stage of this process, both in official convenings of the
Regional Councils and within the early childhood system more broadly.

The 12 Regional Councils are mandated to support an integrated system of early care, health, and education at the local level under
Vermont Statute Title 33 § Chapter 46. In alignment with, and with support from, the State Advisory Council, Regional Councils are tasked
with coordinating and implementing services in accordance with system and regional priorities. Regular Regional Council meetings are
just one way that this mandate is fulfilled.

Early childhood stakeholders from across Vermont bring their perspectives together through Regional Councils 8-10 times a year.
Participants at regional tables include professionals in physical and mental health, social services, basic needs, early childhood care
and education, and preK-12 education; families of children under 9; and community members invested in the well-being of young children.

Annually, each Regional Council sets two regional priorities to guide their work. The map below illustrates the top two priorities of
each region, showcasing the similarities and differences among the 12 regions in Vermont.

Franklin & Grand Isle
Orleans & Northern Essex
• Equitable access to services
• Building resilience in children,
• Family safety and mental health
families and communities
• Family safety and mental health
Lamoille Valley
• Supporting an integrated system
Caledonia & Southern Essex
of care
• Building resilience in children,
• Building resilience in children,
families and communities
families and communities
• Early childhood workforce development
Chittenden
• Family engagement and support
Central Vermont
• Family safety and mental health
• Access to basic needs
• Child and family mental health

Addison
Northern Windsor & Orange
• Building resilience in children,
families and communities
• Supporting an integrated system of care
• Early childhood workforce development
• Early childhood workforce development

Rutland
Springfield Area
• Equitable access to services
• Family engagement and support
• Early childhood workforce development
• Access to basic needs

Bennington
Southeast Vermont
• Family safety and mental health
• Family safety and mental health
• Early childhood workforce development
• Early childhood workforce development

More information about each region, including Regional Council meetings, can be found at
buildingbrightfutures.org/what-we-do/regional-councils/

| 
24 The State of Vermont's Children
Introduction to
Regional Profiles
The following regional profiles offer a snapshot of selected indicators
of child and family well-being for each of Vermont’s 12 regions,
which line up with the Agency of Human Services Districts.
Each indicator represents the most high-quality, up-to-date data
that is available at the regional level and includes the same data
from five years prior for comparison.

Each profile includes a highlight of a Regional Council success as
well as five key data points: 1. The estimated population of children
under 10, 2. The percentage of children under 12 living in households
with incomes below 185% of the Federal Poverty Level (the benchmark
for many benefit programs), 3. The number of children under 9
living in out-of-home custody, 4. The percentage of children ready
for kindergarten, and 5. The percentage of third grade children reading
at or above “proficient.”

Current Status of All Vermont Children

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children
children
under 12
under 9
under 10
541 
60,364 
30.4% 
(22,125)

Decreased from 62,535 in 2016          Decreased from 35.1% in 2015 (26,732)       Decreased from 618 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments
VERMONT STUDENTS            KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
42.5%
All Students                   85%
39.3%
Male                      82%
45.9%
Female                     89%
25.4%
Free and Reduced Lunch Eligible          74%
54.2%
Not Free and Reduced Lunch Eligible        91%
NA
Attended Publicly Funded PreK          87%
NA
Did Not Attend Publicly Funded PreK        80%
27.4%
Historically Marginalized             NA
59.1%
Not Historically Marginalized           NA

| 
2022 Year in Review 25
REGIONAL PROFILES

Addison
Mary Jane Broughton (1951-2022) was a teacher in Addison County for
more than 40 years. She taught, encouraged, and mentored other teachers
as she continued her own education in instructional best practices.
The Addison Regional Council was inspired by Mary Jane’s passion
for supporting the early childhood workforce and her deep devotion
to mentorship. She was a dedicated teacher who loved children and loved
to see them grow. Her passing in March inspired the Addison Regional
Council to create a scholarship fund to support professional development
for early childhood educators working with children birth to age 8 in
community or public school programs. Priority is given to applicants
looking to further their knowledge in the area of social-emotional learning.
The recipients in the fund’s first year included a new teacher working in
a nature-based program and two family child care providers and former
colleagues of Mary Jane who are building on work the three of them
did together.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children
children
under 12
under 9
under 10
3,116 29 
22.5% 
(874)

Decreased from 3,328 in 2016           Decreased from 35.3% in 2015 (1,486)        Decreased from 32 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                   KINDERGARTEN        3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT             READINESS (FALL 2021)       PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Addison Central SD                    91%
49.5%
Addison Northwest SU                  86%
60.7%
Addison Rutland Unified Union SD / Slate Valley Unified Union SD 95%
28.2%
Addison Northeast Unified SD / Mount Abraham Union SD   86%
47.6%

| 
26 The State of Vermont's Children
Bennington
In order to ensure that children and families have access to high-quality
opportunities, the early childhood workforce must have access to
high-quality training and professional advancement. This issue was
the focus of the Bennington Regional Council in 2022, in partnership
with the Bennington Quality Task Force and with input from the
Bennington Early Childhood Network. Following a pause during the
COVID-19 pandemic, the Quality Task Force reestablished in 2022,
coordinating trainings on a range of topics, from CPR to social-
emotional learning, and reinstating developmental screenings using
the Devereux Early Childhood Assessment (DECA). The Bennington
Quality Task Force will continue to work with Northern Lights at the
Community College of Vermont (CCV), to identify the gaps in early
childhood professional development that exist in the Bennington area,
and strategize on how to meet these needs in the region.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children                           children
under 12
under 10 under 9
3,509 
57 
34.9% 
(1,484)

Decreased from 3,605 in 2016 Increased by from 49 in 2017
Decreased from 49.4% in 2015 (2,137) 

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments

SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Battenkill Valley SU                  Not Available
50.0%
Bennington Rutland SU                88%
49.1%
Southwest Vermont SU                78%
27.2%
Windham Southwest SU                92%
37.5%

| 
2022 Year in Review 27
REGIONAL PROFILES

Caledonia &
Southern Essex
The Caledonia and Southern Essex Regional Council has committed to
increasing diversity, equity, and inclusion throughout the region’s early
childhood system. Supported by funds from the Ben & Jerry’s Foundation,
the Regional Council spearheaded an effort to increase the diversity in
the children’s book collections at five rural libraries, located in Lunenburg,
Danville, St. Johnsbury, Lyndonville, and McIndoe Falls. Council funds
helped each of the libraries expand their collections by purchasing books
and increasing opportunities for children in the region to be exposed to
different cultures and perspectives. For the McIndoe Falls library, this
project was particularly important in two ways. First, with newly available
housing in the community, there are more families with young children
in the area who have started using the library. These books contributed
directly to the revitalization of the children’s section. Second, the new
connection between the Regional Council and the library will inform the
Council of the needs in McIndoe Falls, and Council members and partners
can provide resources and support more directly to the library and families.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children
children
under 12
under 10 
under 9
24
3,172 
41.2% 
(1,593)

Decreased from 3,393 in 2016 Decreased from 40% in 2015 (1,661) Decreased from 39 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments

SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Caledonia Central SU
90%
40.2%
Kingdom East
96%
35%
Orange East SU
84%
26.9%
St Johnsbury SD
84%
22.0%

| 
28 The State of Vermont's Children
Central Vermont
In 2022, the Central Vermont Regional Council’s work focused on three
priorities identified by regional stakeholders: 1) Access to mental
health for children and families, 2) Building social connectedness and
cultivating family voice, and 3) Building stronger supports for families
during the perinatal period. The Council spent the year rebuilding
partnerships, setting vision, and building leadership and trust across
members. Engaging partners and building trust are essential to
making a lasting impact and improving the well-being of children and
families in Central Vermont.

Each Regional Council is led by a small group of partners who serve
as the leadership team. This team is important to set the vision of
the Council, provides direction to the Regional Manager, and monitors
the Regional Action Plan. The Central Vermont Regional Council built
a strong cross-sector leadership team this year, with representatives
from the Vermont Department of Health, the Family Center of
Washington County, and Washington County Mental Health Services.
The Regional Council is committed to engaging and partnering with
parents and families with lived experience, engaging cross-sector
partners to create a system where families know where to get help
when they need it.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children                            children
under 12
under 10                            under 9
64
6,172 34.1% 
(2,509)

Decreased from 6,674 in 2016 Increased from 28.5% in 2015 (2,281) Increased from 57 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Barre SU                       82%
35.3%
Caledonia Central SU                 90%
44.3%
Central Vermont SU                  85%
40.0%
Harwood Unified Union SD               86%
51.4%
Montpelier Roxbury SD                81%
38.8%
Orange Southwest SU                 89%
59.0%
Washington Central SU                84%
??

| 
2022 Year in Review 29
REGIONAL PROFILES

Chittenden
Substance use disorder seriously affects children and families in
the state of Vermont. A four-year Collective Impact grant from the
University of Vermont Medical Center (concluded in 2022) allowed
the Chittenden Regional Council to better support Vermont families
dealing with substance use disorder. Over the course of this project,
BBF and its partners identified gaps and unmet needs of families in
treatment and recovery and increased coordination of services to
support families dealing with substance use disorder. On June 7, 2022,
BBF concluded the project by hosting an event called “Seeds of Hope"
in collaboration with the Vermont Department of Health and the City
of Burlington’s Racial Equity, Inclusion & Belonging Committee. A
panel of five Vermont parents shared their personal experiences with
substance use disorder. One panelist said, “My children are a huge
part of my recovery. They always have been.” She shared that when
her daughter was born she “needed to be able to give her the best life
that she could possibly have,” and that meant getting into recovery.

Current Status
CHILD
CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 
2* 3 
(2021)
(2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION
IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children                          children
under 12
under 10                          under 9
67
15,345 
24.6% 
(4,550)

Decreased from 15,840 in 2016 Decreased from 26.1% in 2015 (4,995) Decreased from 85 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Burlington SD
78%
42.5%
Champlain Valley SD
95%
71%
Colchester SD
84%
59.2%
Essex Westford SD
91%
52.7%
Milton SD
81%
27.0%
Mount Mansfield Unified Union SD
94%
57%
South Burlington SD
93%
53.0%
Winooski SD
83%
24.0%

| 
30 The State of Vermont's Children
Franklin & Grand Isle
The Franklin Grand Isle Regional Council identified two priorities
for 2022: supporting families’ access to basic needs and building a more
integrated system of care. Given challenges identified by the community,
including the high cost of owning a vehicle and the shortage of public
transportation options in this region, a pilot project during 2022 has
helped families address transportation barriers by providing financial
assistance with vehicle repairs, inspections, winter tire purchases,
and gas cards. Led by Franklin Grand Isle Community Action, Head
Start and the Parent Child Center of Northwestern Counseling and
Support Services (NCSS), and supported by the Vermont Early
Childhood Fund, these financial supports and services related to
transportation are filling a critical need and supporting mobility for
families in this region of the state. As a recent participant of the
program noted, “At a time when fuel prices are soaring and significantly
impacting the financial stability of families, to have funding to support
this significant expense has been an incredible blessing.”

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children                           children
under 12
under 10                           under 9
62
6,544 21.6% 
(1,748)

Decreased from 6,712 in 2016 Decreased from 32.2% in 2015 (2,547) Decreased from 84 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
82%
Franklin Northeast SU
33.5%
91%
Franklin West SU
42.6%
86%
Grand Isle SU
34.0%
93%
Maple Run SD
25.7%
90%
Missisquoi Valley SD
53.5%

| 
2022 Year in Review 31
REGIONAL PROFILES

Lamoille Valley
The Lamoille Regional Council selected early childhood workforce
development as one of two annual priorities and convened a
group of community partners to work on the issue, including
staff from the Green Mountain Technical and Career Center,
HireAbility Vermont, Northeast Kingdom Learning Services (NEKLS),
Northern Lights at CCV, and Apple Tree Learning Center. The group
received funding from the Vermont Early Childhood Fund to host
“Step UP to Childcare,” a project to promote career development
and interest in working in the early childhood field. The goals of
the project were to address barriers to enrollment, full participation,
and completion, such as cost, length of program, access to
re l i a b l e t ra n s p o r t a t i o n , a n d t h e l i m i t e d a v a i l a b i l i t y o f
financial assistance. Although the project as designed did not
come to fruition, lessons were learned, documented, and shared
and new partnerships were forged in the region, all of which will
lead to more successful workforce development opportunities in
the future.

Current Status
CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children                           children
under 12
under 10                           under 9
33
3,233 31.8% 
(1,255)

Increased from 3,443 in 2016 Decreased from 38.8% in 2015 (1,644) Increased from 14 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Lamoille North SU
83%
36.4%
Lamoille South SU
81%
55.1%
Orleans Southwest SU
96%
28.5%

| 
32 The State of Vermont's Children
Northern Windsor & Orange
For many years, the Northern Windsor and Orange Regional Council has
been involved in supporting early educators’ use of social-emotional
learning in classrooms through the implementation of Early Multi-Tiered
Systems of Support (Early MTSS) and the Pyramid Model. Early MTSS
is an evidence-based and trauma-responsive model that advances
equity, diversity, and the full inclusion and participation of each and
every child in their community, school/program, and home.

Representatives from the Orange County Parent Child Center participated
in a Community of Practice, working together to use the Early MTSS
framework to promote social-emotional development and create a more
inclusive learning environment. The Council’s commitment to Early MTSS
is especially important as children and their families continue to face
mental health challenges associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children                           children
under 12
under 10                          under 9
18
29.5% 
4,529 
(1,651)

Decreased from 4,617 in 2016 Decreased from 35.5% in 2015 (1,955) Decreased from 38 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 3RD GRD READING        3RD GRD READING
5 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)      PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Hartford SD
66%
51.7%
Orange East SU
84%
26.9%
Orange Southwest SU
89%
38.8%
Rivendell Interstate SD
100%
34.6%
SAU 70
100%
76.4%
White River Valley SU
80%
45.6%
Windsor Central SU
100%
58.7%
Windsor Southeast SU
87%
44.9%

| 
2022 Year in Review 33
REGIONAL PROFILES

Orleans & Northern Essex
The Orleans and Northern Essex Regional Council has been supporting
the work of the region’s Resilience Beyond Incarceration project. While it
is currently unknown how many families with young children are affected
by parental incarceration in Vermont, the short- and long-term impacts
on child and family well-being are well known. The Regional Council
sponsored a training with Resilience Beyond Incarceration staff to help
early childhood educators to better support children with an incarcerated
family member. While this virtual training was focused on educators in
the Northeast Kingdom, interested individuals from across Vermont were
able to participate. In 2022, funding was discontinued for the Resilience
Beyond Incarceration project; however, the Regional Council will continue
to prioritize its support for children with incarcerated parents, an especially
vulnerable population in the region and across Vermont.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children                           children
under 12
under 10                           under 9
40
44.2% 
(1,540)
2,842 
Decreased from 2,860 in 2016 Decreased from 44% in 2015 (1,530) Increased from 16 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Essex North SU
67%
53.8%
North Country SU
81%
25.7%
Orleans Central SU
82%
41.2%

| 
34 The State of Vermont's Children
Rutland
The Rutland Regional Council recognizes the critical role early
educators play in the community. To highlight this important profession,
the Council initiated the production of A Day in the Life of an Early Educator,
a video to help viewers better understand the experience of being an early
childhood educator and the critical role they play in our communities.
The video is being created in partnership with Rutland County Head
Start, the Rutland County Parent Child Center, Castleton University,
and other Rutland Regional Council stakeholders, and it will be
the centerpiece of a media campaign to highlight and support the
early childhood workforce, one of two priorities of the Council.
The video will be released in 2023, with a universal message that
translates to communities across Vermont.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children                           children
under 12
under 10                           under 9
70
5,452 29.4% 
(1,871)

Decreased from 5,569 in 2016 Decreased from 38.1% in 2015 (2,627) Decreased from 71 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments

SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Slate Valley Unified Union SD
95%
28.2%
Bennington Rutland SU
88%
49.1%
Greater Rutland County SU
76%
37.5%
Mill River Unified Union SD
88%
36.1%
Rutland City SD
71%
29.2%
Rutland Northeast SU
82%
35.2%
Two Rivers SU
65%
16.0%
Windsor Central SU
100%
58.7%

| 
2022 Year in Review 35
REGIONAL PROFILES

Southeast Vermont
The Southeast Vermont Regional Council focused on helping every
child have a strong start by promoting messaging and information
through “The Basics,” a set of five fun, simple, and powerful ways that
every family can give every child a strong start beginning from birth,
and the Windham Family Resource Calendar. “The Basics” is designed
to help whole communities support learning and brain development
in children ages 0-5. The Southeast Vermont Regional Council has
introduced “the Basics” to a range of community groups who work
with children and families. The Windham Family Resource Calendar
showcases local family-friendly events, increasing opportunities for
social connectedness. The calendar has served as a tool to expand
partnerships across organizations throughout the county, building a
stronger regional early childhood network.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children                           children
under 12
under 10                           under 9
51
3,347 
(1,762)
41.9% 
Increased from 3,268 in 2016 Decreased from 44.9% in 2015 (1,762) Increased from 75 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments

SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Windham Central SU                                     54.5%
93%
Windham Northeast SU                                    27.7%
87%
Windham Southeast SU                                    33.1%
82%
Windham Southwest SU                                   37.5%
92%

| 
36 The State of Vermont's Children
Springfield Area
Amid growing concerns about the lack of early childhood education
programs in the region, Chrystal Loyer, a Woodstock parent of an almost-
3-year-old, shared her experience with the Springfield Area Regional
Council. Chrystal also shared stories and data she collected of other
families in the area facing similar challenges, including that local families
were seeking care for at least 22 children, with no available or affordable
child care. The impact on families was significant: some families changed
their work schedules to have one parent scale back or completely
stop working; some chose to move out of Vermont temporarily; some
found child care at an unsustainable cost of as much as $20,000 a year;
some chose to wait to grow a family or decided not to have another child
at all. With support from Springfield Area Regional Council members,
Chrystal and the other families took their stories to the Windsor Central
Supervisory Union school board and local officials. As a result, the school
board voted to increase their budget to serve these children by allocating
space and adding two pre-K teachers and two paraeducators to expand
access to publicly funded pre-K spots.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
1 2* 3 
(2021)                  (2020)                    (2022)
POPULATION         IN POVERTY         HOME CUSTODY

children
children                            children
under 12
under 10                           under 9
26
3,103 38.8% 
(1,375)

Decreased from 3,223 in 2016 Decreased from 48.1% in 2015 (2,107) Decreased from 58 in 2017

*Under 185% of the Federal Poverty Level

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
4 5 
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2021)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2021)
Bennington Rutland SU
88%
49.1%
Springfield SD
75%
30.3%
Two Rivers SU
65%
16.0%
Windham Central SU
93%
54.5%
Windham Northeast SU
87%
27.7%
Windsor Central SU
100%
58.7%
Windsor Southeast SU
87%
44.9%

| 
2022 Year in Review 37
LIMITATIONS

The State of Vermont’s Children: 2022 Year in Review presents the most high-quality, up-to-date data available as
of December 2022. The staff at Building Bright Futures strives to put forward the best data possible in the report.
However, there are several limitations worth noting.

Proxy measures: Due to the small population of Vermont and the current data infrastructure, proxy measures from national
datasets and indicators that capture only a small part of the picture are standard. For example, mental health services and child
care utilization data is available and reported, but the demand for these services is not currently measured.

Timeframes: The timing of data collection and reporting varies among programs. Not all data reported is from the same year
or time period, but instead, captures a range of indicators from the last three years and includes state and federal fiscal years,
calendar years, school years, and point-in-time counts.

Age ranges: Datasets focus on different age ranges that may or may not be comparable across programs. For example,
some datasets and programs focus on children prenatal to age three, while others capture data on children prenatal to age six
or age eight, and others are only available for children under 18.

The COVID-19 pandemic: The pandemic has affected the availability and quality of data. As programs have changed in
response to evolving needs, the monitoring and evaluation systems have been slow to be updated. It may take years to determine
if the changes that have occurred starting in March 2020 will be outliers, or the start of new trends.

Data sources: Although more recent data collected through one-time studies may be more up-to-date, we have prioritized data
sources that are updated annually or biannually, are validated, and/or are based on full population data rather than samples.
The State of Vermont’s Children report reflects our best efforts to identify the most high-quality, up-to-date data. Of note,
we rely on the integrity of the data provided to us by our experienced data partners and do not externally validate the
data provided.

Data steward capacity: As with the majority of human services sectors, the capacity of data stewards across Vermont’s early
childhood system has been challenged by workforce shortages. In several cases, data were not available by the deadline for
publication. When possible, these indicators will be available at Vermontkidsdata.org. It is also not possible to externally validate
data provided by these data stewards.

| 
38 The State of Vermont's Children
ACRONYMS

3SquaresVT: Vermont’s Supplemental Nutrition
FAPE: Free and Appropriate Public Education
Assistance Program (SNAP)
FPL: Federal Poverty Level
504: Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
FRL: Free and Reduced Lunch
ACE: Adverse Childhood Experience
Family Services Division
FSD: 
AHS: Agency of Human Services
(A Division of the Department for Children and Families)
AOE: Agency of Education
FSH: Family Supportive Housing
ARPA: American Rescue Plan
HS/EHS: Head Start/Early Head Start
ASQ: Ages and Stages Questionnaire
IDEA: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
BBF: Building Bright Futures
IEP: Individualized Education Plan
BIPOC: Black, indigenous and people of color
IFSP: Individualized Family Services Plan
BFIS: Bright Futures Information System
MAT: Medication Assisted Treatment
CACFP: Child and Adult Care Food Program
MCH: Maternal and Child Health
CCFAP: Child Care Financial Assistance Program
MESCH: Maternal Early Childhood Sustained Home-Visiting
CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
MIT: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
CDD: Child Development Division (A Division of the
NSCH: National Survey of Children’s Health
Department for Children and Families)
PCC: Parent Child Center
CDDIS: Child Development Division Information System
PCIT: Parent Child Interaction Therapy
CIS: Children’s Integrated Services
PNMI: Private Non-Medical Institutions
COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019
QRIS: Quality Rating Improvement System
CQI: Continuous Quality Improvement
R4K!S: Ready for Kindergarten Survey
DA: Designated Mental Health Agency
SAC: State Advisory Council
DCF: Department for Children and Families
SBAC: Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium
DMH: Department of Mental Health
SD/SU: School District/Supervisory Union
Developmental Understanding and Legal
DULCE: 
SDOH: Social Determinants of Health
Collaboration for Everyone
SSA: Specialized Service Agencies
Early MTSS: Early Multi-Tiered Systems of Support
STARS: STep Ahead Recognition System, Vermont’s QRIS
ED: Emergency Department
TSGOLD: Teaching Strategies Gold
ECFMH: Early Childhood and Family Mental Health
UPK: Universal Prekindergarten Education
ECSA: Vermont’s Child Care and Early Childhood
VDH: Vermont Department of Health
Education Systems Analysis
VECAP: Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan
ECSE: Early Childhood Special Education Services
VERAP: Vermont Emergency Rental Assistance Program
EI: Early Intervention
WIC: Women Infants and Children
EST: Educational Support Team

| 
2022 Year in Review 39
REFERENCES

19. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates, Tables B25070
DEMOGRAPHICS
and 25091, Vermont (2021).
1. Vermont Department of Health
. Population of Vermont by AHS/VDH Districts, Age and Sex,
2000-2021. Retrieved from https://www.healthvermont.gov/health-statistics-vital-
Retrieved from data.census.gov
records/vital-records-population-data/vermont-population-estimates
20. U.S. Census Bureau. (2021). American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates, Table DP04, Vermont.
2. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates,
Retrieved from data.census.gov
Table B17024, Vermont (2015 and 2020). Retrieved from data.census.gov
21. Department for Children and Families.
Access Eligibility System. Unpublished data.
3. Department for Children and Families. FSD Quarterly Management Reports,
22. USDA Economic Research Service. (2022).
Food Security in the U.S.
Q3 annually. Data provided by the Division Quality Assurance Supervisor.
Retrieved from https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-
4. 
Grandfamilies.org. (2021). State Fact Sheets - Vermont. Retrieved from
security-in-the-u-s/measurement/
https://www.grandfamilies.org/Portals/0/State%20Fact%20Sheets/Vermont%20
23. Feeding America. (2020).
Map the Meal Gap.
GrandFacts%20State%20Fact%20Sheet%202021%20Update.pdf
Retrieved from https://map.feedingamerica.org/county/2020/child/vermont
24. Vermont Agency of Education Child Nutrition Programs. (2022).
BASIC NEEDS
Annual Statistical Report. (2021 - 2022).
1. Feeding America. (2023).
Children and Families.
Retrieved from https://education.vermont.gov/sites/aoe/files/documents/edu-nutrition-
Retrieved from https://hungerandhealth.feedingamerica.org/explore-our-work/
2022-free-and-reduced-eligibility-report.pdf
programs-target-populations/children-and-families/
Vermont Agency of Education (2022). Unpublished data.
25. 
Stable housing is foundational to children's well-being.
2. Acosta, S. (2022).
26. Department of Children and Families. (2022).
3Squares, Monthly Report by County.
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Retrieved from https://www.cbpp.org/blog/
Retrieved from https://outside.vermont.gov/dept/DCF/Shared%20Documents/ESD/
stable-housing-is-foundational-to-childrens-well-being
Reports/3SqVT-County.pdf
The effects of housing insecurity on children’s health:
Bess et al. (2022).
3. 
27. Department of Children and Families (2022).
Extra 3SquaresVT Food Benefits
a scoping review. Oxford Academic. Retrieved from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/
in September & October.
advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/heapro/daac006/6522744
Retrieved from https://dcf.vermont.gov/dcf-blog/extra-3squaresvt-food-benefits-
Poverty guidelines.
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. (2022).
4. 
september-october
Retrieved from https://aspe.hhs.gov/topics/poverty-economic-mobility/poverty-guidelines
28. Vermont Department of Health. Provided by the Public Health Nutrition Specialist for WIC.
U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates,
5. 
Unpublished data.
Table B17024, Vermont (2015 and 2020). Retrieved from data.census.gov
29. Henly, J. R., Adams, G. (2018).
Insights on Access to Quality Child Care for Families
State inflation tracker.
JEC Republicans. (2022).
6. 
Living in Rural Areas. Urban Institute.
Retrieved from https://www.jec.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/af0ee746-09ae-48f0-
Retrieved from www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/99149/insights_on_
9f1b-fefbb334996d/inflation-tracker-september.pdf
access_to_quality_child_care_for_families_living_in_rural_areas_1.pdf.
Living wage calculation for Vermont.
MIT Living Wage Calculator. (2022).
7. 
30. 
Green Mountain Transit. (2022).
Fare Free Service.
Retrieved from https://livingwage.mit.edu/states/50
Retrieved from https://ridegmt.com/fare-free-service-2/
Reach up Benefit. Unpublished data.
Department for Children and Families.
8. 
31. Building Bright Futures Vermont. (2022).
Vermont Early Childhood Fund.
Retrieved from https://buildingbrightfutures.org/vecf/
9. Vermont Department of Labor. (2022).
Minimum Wage for Vermont Employers and Workers.
Retrieved from https://labor.vermont.gov/sites/labor/files/doc_library/Minimum%20
32. State of Vermont Department of Public Service. (2022).
Wage%20Post%20-%202022_v2.pdf
Broadband High-Speed Internet Availability in Vermont.
Retrieved from http://publicservice.vermont.gov/telecommunications-and-connectivity/
10. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates. (2021).
broadband-high-speed-internet-availability-vermont
Table DP03, Vermont. Retrieved from data.census.gov
11. 
MIT Living Wage Calculator. (2022).
Living wage calculator technical notes.
RESILIENT FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
Retrieved from https://livingwage.mit.edu/resources/Living-Wage-Users-Guide-
1. Center for the Study of Social Policy. (2018).
About Strengthening Families.
Technical-Documentation-2022-05-10.pdf
Retrieved from cssp.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/About-Strengthening-Families.pdf
12. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2022).
2. Building Bright Futures Vermont. (2019).
Guiding Principles.
Homelessness Resources: Youth. Retrieved from https://www.samhsa.gov/
Retrieved from https://buildingbrightfutures.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Vermont-
homelessness-programs-resources/hpr-resources/youth
Guiding-Principles-AOE-BBF-HMGV-HEECC.pdf
The McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act.
13. 
Hud.gov. (2009).
3. Bethell et. al. (2019).
Positive Childhood Experiences and Adult Mental and Relational
Retrieved from https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/HAAA_HEARTH.PDF
Health in a Statewide Sample: Associations Across Adverse Childhood Experiences Levels.
JAMA Pediatrics.
14. Vermont Agency of Education.
Number of McKinney Vento Eligible Children Enrolled
Retrieved from https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapediatrics/fullarticle/2749336
in School under 9 by Age. Unpublished data.
4. Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative.
National Survey of Children’s Health,
15. Vermont Coalition to End Homelessness and Chittenden County Homeless Alliance. (2022).
2016-2021. Data Resource Center for Child and Adolescent Health supported by the
Vermont’s Annual Point-in-Time Count of Those Experiencing Homelessness.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services
Retrieved from https://helpingtohousevt.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/2022-
Administration (HRSA), Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB).
Vermont-Point-in-Time-Report.pdf
Retrieved from www.childhealthdata.org
16. 
Department of Children and Families. (2022).
Family Supportive Housing Program
Vermont Network. (2022). Provided by the Director of Member Relations at vtnetwork.org.
5. 
Annual Report: State Fiscal Year 2022. Retrieved from https://outside.vermont.gov/dept/
Unpublished data.
DCF/Shared%20Documents/OEO/FSH/FSH-AR-SFY2022.pdf
Agency of Human Services. (2021 - 2022). AHS Report Catalog-CSI Timeliness Risk
6. 
17. Vermont State Housing Authority. (2022).
Vermont Emergency Rental Assistance Program.
Levels Case Disposition Report for intervention type. Data Note: Totals by SFY (07/01/21-
Retrieved from https://www.vsha.org/
06/30/22). Assessments total combines Ch.49 and JPA family assessments. FSDnet for
18. 
Joint Fiscal Committee. (2022).
Emergency Rental Assistance Approval Request.
total intakes provided by the Division Quality Assurance Supervisor.
Retrieved from https://ljfo.vermont.gov/assets/Meetings/Joint-Fiscal-
Department for Children and Families. (2022).
7. 
FSD Quarterly Management Reports,
Committee/2022-12-14/a70b42a56b/JFC-12142022-ERA2-Program-Overview-v2.pdf

| 
40 The State of Vermont's Children
6. Vermont Agency of Education. (2022)
Q3 annually. Data provided by the Division Quality Assurance Supervisor.                   Number of Children Receiving Student Support
8. Vermont’s Department for Children and Families. (2021).             Services under 9 by Age. Unpublished data.
Vermont’s Family First
Prevention Services Act Prevention Plan.                7. Department for Children and Families. (2022). Provided by the Children’s Integrated
Services Director.
Retrieved from https://outside.vermont.gov/dept/DCF/Shared%20Documents/FSD/           Children’s Integrated Services Encounter Report. Unpublished data.
Reviews/FFPSA-Prevention-2022.pdf
8. National Institute for Early Education Research. (2016).
Preschool Policy Brief -
Perspectives on the Impact of Pre-K Expansion.
HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
Retrieved from https://nieer.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/22.pdf
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022).
Social Determinants of Health.
9. Office of Early Childhood Development. (2022).
Preschool Development Birth through
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/about/sdoh/index.html#:~:text=What%20Are%20
Five (PDG B-5). Retrieved from https://www.acf.hhs.gov/ecd/early-learning/
Social%20Determinants%20of,the%20conditions%20of%20daily%20life.
preschool-development-grants
2. Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative.
National Survey of Children’s Health,
10. Vermont Department of Health. (2021-2022).
Child Care Vaccination Coverage Data.
2016-2021. Data Resource Center for Child and Adolescent Health supported by the
Awaiting publication.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services
11. Let’s Grow Kids. (2022).
Stalled at the Start: Vermont’s Child Care Challenge.
Administration (HRSA), Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB).
Retrieved from https://letsgrowkids.org/client_media/files/FinalSATS2022.pdf
Retrieved from www.childhealthdata.org. Original analyses conducted by Dora
12. Vermont Department for Children and Families. (2022) Data provided by the Senior
Levinson, MPH, Research and Data Director at Building Bright Futures.
Process and Performance Analyst at the Child Development Division.
3. Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative.
National Survey of Children’s Health,
Awaiting publication.
2016-2021. Data Resource Center for Child and Adolescent Health supported by
Vermont Head Start Collaboration Office. (2022).
13. 
Vermont Program Information Report.
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services
Available on public request from eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov
Administration (HRSA), Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB).
Retrieved from www.childhealthdata.org.
14. Vermont Agency of Education. (2022).
Vermont Education Dashboard: Enrollment 2022.
Retrieved from education.vermont.gov/data-and-reporting/vermont-education-
4. Vermont Department of Health.
Immunizations.
Retrieved from https://www.healthvermont.gov/disease-control/immunization
dashboard/enrollment
5. Vermont Department of Health. (2021).
Vaccine Coverage 2021.
15. 
Vermont General Assembly. (2021). Vt. Stat. Ann., tit. 16 V.S.A. § 1162.
Retrieved from https://www.healthvermont.gov/sites/default/files/documents/pdf/imr-
Retrieved from https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/section/16/025/01162
vaccination-coverage-2021-annual-report.pdf
16. Vermont Agency of Education. (2022) Data Division. Unpublished data.
6. National Center for Health Statistics at CDC. (2022).
Immunization.
17. Afterschool Alliance. (2020) Vermont After 3PM.
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/immunize.htm
Retrieved from http://www.afterschoolalliance.org/AA3PM/data/geo/Vermont/overview
7. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022).
Breastfeeding Report Card.
18. 
Office of Governor Phil Scott. (2021).
Executive Order 08-21 Vermont Interagency
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/data/reportcard.htm
Afterschool Youth Task Force.
8. Vermont Department of Health. (2021). Vermont Vital Statistics Annual Report.
Retrieved from governor.vermont.gov/sites/scott/files/documents/EO%2008-21%20-%20
Retrieved from https://www.healthvermont.gov/health-statistics-vital-records/vital-
Vermont%20Interagency%20Afterschool%20Youth%20Task%20Force.pdf.
records-population-data/vermont-population-estimates
19. 
Vermont Afterschool. (2022). Provided by the Communications & Development Coordinator.
9. 
Vermont Department of Health. (2020).
Vermont Pregnancy Risk Assessment
Unpublished data.
Monitoring System (PRAMS).
20. Vermont Agency of Education. (2023).
Ready for Kindergarten! Survey (R4K!S)
Retrieved from https://www.healthvermont.gov/health-statistics-vital-records/
Report 2021-2022. Awaiting publication.
population-health-surveys-data/pregnancy-risk-assessment-and
21. Vermont Agency of Education. (2021).
Vermont Education Dashboard: Assessment 2021.
10. Vermont Department of Health. Provided by the Research and Statistics Chief.
Retrieved from education.vermont.gov/data-and-reporting/vermont-education-
Data Note: Analyses were limited to discharges of live born Vermont residents at
dashboard/assessment
Vermont hospitals, excluding transfers from other facilities. Newborns in this analysis
22. State of Vermont Agency of Education. (2022).
Vermont Selects Cognia as Statewide
were identified by any mention of ICD-10-CM diagnosis code P96.1. Unpublished data.
Assessment Vendor.
11. Vermont Care Partners. (2022). Provided by the Vermont Department of Mental Health.
Retrieved from https://education.vermont.gov/news/vt-selects-congia-new-
Unpublished data.
assessment-vendor
12. 
Vermont Association of Hospitals and Health Systems. (2022). Provided by the Director
REGIONAL PROFILES
of Policy Analysis and Development. Data unpublished.
1. Vermont Department of Health. (2021).
Population of Vermont by AHS/VDH Districts,
13. 
Vermont Department of Mental Health. (2022). Child and Adolescent Family Unit.
Age and Sex, 2000-2021.
Unpublished data.
Retrieved from https://www.healthvermont.gov/health-statistics-vital-records/vital-
records-population-data/vermont-population-estimates
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND EDUCATION
2. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates, Table B17024,
1. State of Vermont Blueprint for Health. (2020).
Community Health Profile Data.
Vermont (2015 and 2020). Retrieved from data.census.gov
Retrieved from https://blueprintforhealth.vermont.gov/community-health-profiles
3. Department for Children and Families. (2022).
FSD Quarterly Management Reports,
Help Me Grow Vermont. (2021).
2. 
Ages and Stages (ASQ) Enterprise Online System.
Q3 annually. Data provided by the Division Quality Assurance Supervisor.
Unpublished data.
4. Vermont Agency of Education. (2021-2022).
Ready for Kindergarten! Survey (R4K!S)
3. Vermont Parent Child Center Network. (2022). Provided by the interim Vermont Parent
Report 2021-2022. Awaiting publication.
Child Center Network Co-Chair. Unpublished data.
5. 
Vermont Agency of Education. (2021).
Vermont Education Dashboard: Assessment 2021.
U.S Department of Education. (2018). Individuals with Disabilities Act. Chapter III—
4. 
Retrieved from education.vermont.gov/data-and-reporting/vermont-education-
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, Department of Education.
dashboard/assessment
Retrieved from https://sites.ed.gov/idea/regs/
Department for Children and Families. (2022) Provided by the Children’s Integrated Services
5. 
Director. Awaiting publication in the Vermont IDEA Part C – Child Count and Settings report.

| 
2022 Year in Review 41
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The State of Vermont’s Children: 2022 Year in Review is truly a collaborative effort.

On behalf of the Vermont Early Childhood State Advisory Council Network, we would like to express our sincerest gratitude to
the following agencies, stakeholders, and organizations for their contributions to developing content, identifying and sharing key
topics, and providing data:

Vermont Afterschool, the Vermont Agency of Education, the Vermont Association of Hospitals and Health Systems, the Vermont
Blueprint for Health, Vermont Care Partners, Champlain Valley Office of Economic Opportunity, the Vermont Department
for Children and Families (Child Development Division, Economic Services Division, Family Services Division, and Office
of Economic Opportunity), the Vermont Department of Health, the Vermont Department of Labor, the Vermont Department
of Mental Health, Help Me Grow Vermont, Hunger Free Vermont, Vermont Kin as Parents, Let’s Grow Kids, the Vermont
Network Against Domestic & Sexual Violence, the Vermont Office of Racial Equity, the Vermont Parent Child Center Network,
and the Urban Institute.

We are incredibly grateful for the collaboration and continuous guidance of the Building Bright Futures State Advisory Council,
the 12 Regional Councils, and the 7 Vermont Early Childhood Action Plan Committees.

Thank you to Dave Lapointe and Gary Bisaga for creating the Vermontkidsdata.org platform, which highlights this report’s data
alongside early childhood policy efforts and publications. Your collective expertise, vision, and commitment allow BBF to compile
and disseminate critical data in an easily accessible, dynamic, and responsive way.

We continue to be inspired by Vermont’s commitment to using the most up-to-date, high-quality data to inform policy and service
provision for young children and their families.

PUBLICATION INFORMATION

Design & Layout
2022 Managing Editors
Alice Jarabek, Graphic Designer
Dora Levinson, MPH, Research and Data Director
Nicole D’Agostino, M.A., Data and Policy Manager
Printing & Production
Anna Brouillette, M.Ed., Policy and Program Director
Building Bright Futures would like to thank the National Life
Beth Truzansky, Deputy Director
Group Foundation for their generous contribution to the
Morgan Crossman, Ph.D., M.A., Executive Director
production of this report.

Suggested citation: Levinson, D., D’Agostino, N., Brouillette, A., Truzansky, B., & Crossman, M. (Eds.). (2023).
The State of Vermont’s Children: 2022 Year in Review. Building Bright Futures: Williston, VT.
Retrieved from buildingbrightfutures.org/state-of-vermonts-children

| 
42 The State of Vermont's Children
OUR TEAM
STAFF
Dr. Morgan Crossman, Executive Director
Beth Truzansky, Deputy Director
Ali Dieng, Regional Manager for Central Vermont, Chittenden,
and Franklin and Grand Isle
Allison Oskar, Finance Manager
Anna Brouillette, Policy and Program Director
Courtney Hillhouse, Regional Manager for Northern Windsor
and Orange, Southeast Vermont, and Springfield Area
Darla Senecal, Regional Manager for Addison, Bennington, and Rutland
Dora Levinson, Research and Data Director
Katie Mobbs, Office Manager
Linda Michniewicz, Regional Manager for Caledonia and
Southern Essex, Lamoille Valley, and Orleans and Northern Essex
Nicole D’Agostino, Data and Policy Manager

STATE ADVISORY COUNCIL
Cheryle Wilcox, SAC Public Co-Chair; Vermont Department
of Mental Health
Flor Diaz Smith, SAC Private Co-Chair; Vermont School
Boards Association
Rep. Jessica Brumsted, Vermont House of Representatives
Libby Daghlian, Parent Representative
Xusana Davis, Agency of Administration, Office of Racial Equity
Paul Dragon, Champlain Valley Office of Economic Opportunity
Alexis Duquette, Parent Representative
Renee Kelly, SAC Secretary; Head Start Collaboration Office
Eddie Gale, A. D. Henderson Foundation
Dimitri Garder, Global-Z International
Miranda Gray, Department for Children and Families,
Child Development Division
Sen. Ruth Hardy, Vermont Senate
Amy Johnson, Parent Child Center Network
Janet McLaughlin, Vermont Association for the Education
of Young Children
Mike McRaith, Vermont Principals’ Association
Dr. Ashley Miller, South Royalton Health Center
Aryka Radke, Department for Children and Families,
Family Services Division (non-voting member)
Kendal Smith, Governor’s Office (non-voting member)
Ilisa Stalberg, Vermont Department of Health
Christy Swenson, Capstone Community Action / Head Start
Sarah Truckle, Agency of Human Services, Secretary’s Office
Kate Rogers, Agency of Education
Rebecca Webb, SAC Treasurer; Barre Unified Union School District
Jessica Vintinner, Vermont Agency of Commerce
and Community Development
Heather Wilcoxon, Health Care & Rehabilitation Services
| 
2022 Year in Review 43
of Southeastern Vermont
What is vermontkidsdata.org?
Vermontkidsdata.org is a hub of the most high-quality,
up-to-date information on the status of children and
families across sectors. It is a critical tool for
answering policy questions by centralizing data from
the complex early childhood system.
Data Question
Do you have a question about
early childhood data in Vermont?
For example, the status of
universal prekindergarten
Data Dashboard
education (UPK)?
Vermontkidsdata.org includes searchable
individual data points across sectors (mental
health, basic needs, child development, and
education). For UPK, the data dashboard contains
the most recent data on UPK enrollment.

Publications
The publications page is a robust
collection of Vermont-specific
and national publications by
topic. The page is organized to
provide a broad overview of each
component of the early
childhood system and dive into
what is known about a particular
topic. UPK publications include
official documents, studies, and
reports that can be used to
inform policy development.

Policy
The policy sections outline
how the BBF Network and
State Advisory Council
identify priorities, make
recommendations, and track
progress on those
recommendations. Other
policy work includes
documentation of legislative
testimony, data briefs, and
What’s next?
analysis of and advisement on
Vermontkidsdata.org provides the foundation for Vermonters to
federal legislation. UPK is a
understand what data and evidence exist (and what is missing) to
clear priority identified in the
build an early childhood system that is integrated, well-resourced,
2021 Policy Recommendations
and data-informed (VECAP Goal 4). Two mechanisms that will be
under “Develop a
used to support this work are Early Childhood Grand Rounds and the
Well-Resourced Early Care and
Data and Evaluation Committee.
Education System.”

Vermontkidsdata.org is a program of Building Bright Futures