How are Vermont’s
Young Children
and Families?
2020 REPORT
From the

GOVERNOR
Giving kids a healthy start is critical. As a former contractor, I know the stronger the
foundation, the better the chance of a long lasting, positive outcome later in life. The
science on brain development shows the importance of investing in our young children
as it sets the foundation for life course outcomes, not only for individual children, but
also for strong communities and a vibrant economy.

This year we all learned just how important resources and supports are for young children and families as we came
together to address the COVID-19 pandemic. I want to recognize our early childhood workforce who stepped up from the
start to provide critical services for children and their families. We still have work to do to make my vision for a cradle-to-
career system an integrated, comprehensive, high quality system that is equitable, accessible and will improve outcomes
for each and every child and their family. This starts with access to high-quality early education for children under five,
and continues with Prekindergarten education, kindergarten through grade 3, and after school and out-of-school care.
Together this provides children with the development, education and skills they need to reach optimal outcomes and be
successful later in life. One bright spot from this health crisis is that we’ve continued to move forward in this vision even
during the pandemic.

The pandemic uncovered and intensified many of the stressors on our most vulnerable Vermonters. Some of our
greatest challenges heading into the pandemic included the gaps that families faced in their ability to meet basic needs
(p. 15), the rate of young children with social, emotional or behavioral health conditions (p. 22), and the need for high-
quality child care (p. 27). The national spotlight on racial inequity has likewise revealed gaps and barriers for Vermonters
of color.

While the needs are great, this year has demonstrated the strength of our families and communities and the
opportunities that lie ahead of us. My hope is that this report inspires you to join in our collective work as a state to
make Vermont the best possible place for children and families to live.

Sincerely,

Philip B. Scott
Governor
From the

EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR
It is an honor to serve as the Executive Director of Building Bright Futures (BBF),
Vermont’s Early Childhood public-private partnership mandated by Vermont’s Act
104 and the federal Head Start Act to advise the Governor and legislature on the current status of children prenatal to
age eight and their families. In this role, it is my responsibility to lead the Early Childhood State Advisory Council (SAC)
and regional network, which includes over 300 individuals across all sectors, to assure that policy is developed and
decisions are made using evidence to always hold the best interest of children and families at the forefront. One of BBF’s
responsibilities is to maintain Vermont’s vision and strategic plan for early childhood and monitor progress on child and
family outcomes over time. We do this through Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP) which outlines a cohesive
vision by the year 2026, and establishes shared accountability to achieve statewide priorities for children and families.
This eighth iteration of the How Are Vermont’s Young Children and Families report is another mechanism by which BBF
monitors progress toward Vermont’s vision and reports to policy-makers.

The 2020 report starts by highlighting the results of the Early Childhood Needs Assessment and the updated VECAP,
followed by SAC recommendations in five key areas: (1) Recognize Vermont’s early care and education system and
workforce as essential; (2) Mitigate COVID impacts on family economic stability and mental health; (3) Recognize chronic
inequities and racism as a public health crisis; (4) Empower family voice to rebuild a stronger system; and (5) Evolve
our data system to address gaps. The introduction concludes with the 2020 Early Childhood Spotlight on the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic. The body of the report captures data across a range of sectors. The 2020 report features new
data on a range of services, resources and supports Vermont offers to improve optimal developmental and educational
outcomes for children. This highlight includes enrollment in early intervention, Early Childhood special education services,
Children’s Integrated Services, Head Start and Early Head Start, as well as support from Parent Child Centers and Help Me
Grow, providing a snapshot of how Vermont serves the most vulnerable young children and their families.

Ensuring each and every child has what they need to thrive and succeed early in life sets the foundation for long-term
outcomes for that child, but also for a healthy economy and community. It is critical to continually monitor and evaluate
Vermont’s Early Childhood system and child and family outcomes to understand the impact of policies, programs and
decisions and ensure that children’s needs are met. Answering the call to centralize data to inform policy from Vermont’s
legislature, statewide Early Childhood partners, and the EC Needs Assessment, BBF created Vermont’s Early Childhood
Resource, Data, and Policy Center. The Center will house each iteration of the annual report, valuable cross-sector
resources, Vermont-specific and national data, policy briefs, a scorecore to monitor VECAP indicators, fact sheets and
more. Paired with the How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families? report, the Center will help raise the visibility of key
issues affecting Vermont's children and families, making it easier for leaders, policymakers, families, and communities
to use data to make informed policy and program decisions that will ultimately ensure children’s success. I hope that
together, this report and Center inspire you to evaluate our collective work to improve the lives of children and families in
Vermont, because our children are the future, and the future is bright!

Sincerely,

Morgan K. Crossman, Ph.D., M.A.
Executive Director
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Role of Building Bright Futures
1
Early Childhood Systems Needs Assessment
2
The Vermont Early Childhood Action Plan
3
Early Childhood State Advisory Council Recommendations
6
COVID-19 Data Spotlight
12
Demographics
14
Basic Needs
15
Resilient Families & Communities
18
Health & Well-Being
20
Child Development & Education
23
Regional Profiles
31
Limitations
43
Acronyms
43
References
44
Acknowledgments
47
MISSION
To improve the well-being of each and every child and family in
Vermont by using evidence to inform policy and bringing voices
together to discuss critical challenges and problem solve.

VISION
BBF maintains the vision and strategic plan for Vermont’s Early Childhood
System. Vermont’s vision for the Early Childhood system is to be an
integrated continuum of comprehensive, high quality services that is
equitable and accessible and will improve outcomes for each and every
child in the prenatal period to age eight and their family in Vermont.

Building Bright Futures (BBF) is Vermont’s Early Childhood
public-private partnership mandated by Vermont’s Act 104
Convening
and the federal Head Start Act to serve as the State Advisory
Council (SAC) on Early Childhood. The SAC is the mechanism
Responding
Monitoring
to advise the Governor and Legislature on the current status
of children from the prenatal period to age eight and their
families. Within these legislative mandates, BBF is charged
with 5 primary responsibilities:

BBF is the only organization in Vermont with the robust
infrastructure (staffing, committees, networks, communications)
Advising
Empowering
necessary to be flexible and adapt to emerging legislative,
community, public and private needs while supporting the Early
Childhood system in addressing the complex health, education,
behavioral health, and safety conditions surrounding all children
in the prenatal period to age eight and their families in Vermont.

BBF has a multi-tiered infrastructure consisting of 12
regional councils, the State Advisory Council (SAC), and
7 committees that move The Vermont Early Childhood
Action Plan (VECAP) forward including the Early Childhood
Interagency Coordinating Team (ECICT). BBF informs
this infrastructure by identifying and presenting the most
POLICY MAKERS
up-to-date high-quality data. Our regional and statewide
INTERAGENCY
infrastructure allows BBF to have a presence in every
COORDINATING TEAM
corner of the state and in all communities. This network
allows for the communication and escalation of barriers,
STATE ADVISORY COUNCIL
and challenges and recommendations from both regions
VECAP COMMITTEES
and from the State Advisory Council to policy makers.
As decisions are made, the BBF infrastructure facilitates
12 REGIONAL COUNCILS
changes to the Early Childhood system to improve the
CHILDREN & FAMILIES
EVIDENCE & DATA
lives of children and families across the state.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 1
Early Childhood Systems Needs Assessment
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2020
Vermont’s PDG-5 Needs Assessment highlighted the conditions of the early care and education system for Vermont’s
35,769 children 0 to 5. Overarching needs include data gaps, chronic underfunding, and limited family engagement.

1 in 5 children
between the
% 
3 6 
of children under age 6 live in
ages of 6 and 8 has a social, emotional, or
households with income below 200% of the
behavioral health condition, while this is only
Federal Poverty Level.
true for 
8% of children under 5.

% 
“Chronic
Lack of funding
6 2 
of infants lack access to a child
care provider, up to 89% in rural counties
lack of funding undermines the quality of
(pre-COVID).
supports we provide.”

% 
Only 2 
1,004 
unique cases of child
of EC stakeholders reported
that the workforce has the resources necessary to
abuse and neglect in 2019.
meet the needs of children and families.

Vermont collects a tremendous amount of data, but does not readily
have the data available that leaders need to make decisions about EC
investments, resources, and strategies in one, easily accessible place.

Methodology: The needs assessment collected primary
Workforce: 
Developing and sustaining a pipeline of early
data through a survey and focus groups with families, early
childhood professionals is costly and remains a challenge across
childhood providers and other community and agency leaders,
the state.
and reviewed 18 documents with data and information on the
status of children and families.
System Integration: 
Rigid policies and funding have many
services still operating in silos. Alignment, collaboration and
The Needs Assessment Found:
coordination efforts remain a challenge at the system level and are
Equity and Vulnerable Populations: 
Gaps in the Early
necessary for success at the regional level, starting with aligned
Childhood system more severely impact specific groups.
messaging in the mixed-delivery system.
Families living in rural communities, BIPOC, and children who
Family Leadership and Engagement: 
EC stakeholders at all
experience other risk factors, such as poverty, homelessness,
levels of the system need to recognize families as partners whose
or immigrant/refugee status, face exacerbated access, quality
voices are critical to the system’s success.
and affordability gaps.

Resources and Funding:
Despite the successful investments
Quality and Accessibility: 
Access to childcare remains a
in Vermont’s EC system, EC programs are not adequately funded,
significant challenge across the state, particularly for infants and
and securing stable funding is a significant concern for EC programs
toddlers.
across the state.
Early Childhood and Family Mental Health:
High Quality Data: 
Lack of high quality data across the Early
Vermont’s EC community is deeply concerned for the current
Childhood system limits knowledge of outcomes and services and
mental health challenges of children and families and the potential
undermines informed decision-making at the state and local levels.
lasting secondary effects of COVID-19.

2 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
VERMONT EARLY CHILDHOOD
The 5 year vision
1
(   ) 
ACTION PLAN VECAP
& strategic plan

VERMONT’S VISION
Vermont aspires to realize the promise of each and every Vermont child by ensuring that the Early
Childhood system is an integrated, continuous, comprehensive, high quality system of services that is
equitable, accessible and will improve outcomes for children in the prenatal period to age eight and their
families in Vermont.

which to build coordinated action across public and private
Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP)
stakeholders throughout Vermont. It centers around making
is a bold, collaborative approach to building a comprehensive and
measurable changes in early childhood outcomes through
integrated Early Childhood system that promotes healthy child
identification of common goals, strategies to reach those
development and family stability. The VECAP outlines a cohesive
goals, and the use of common language to align initiatives.
vision by the year 2026, and establishes shared accountability
It is built on Vermont’s Guiding Principles which articulate
to achieve statewide priorities for children and families from the
Vermont’s commitment to fully include each and every child
prenatal period through age eight.
and their family in a continuum of meaningful experiences to
Originally established in 2013 along with the Vermont Early
ensure their health, mental health, education, safety, happiness
Childhood Framework, the updated VECAP is a structure around
and success now and into the future.

MAKING CHANGE FOR CHILDREN, FAMILIES,
COMMUNITIES AND THE EARLY CHILDHOOD SYSTEM
Figure 1
Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan
(VECAP) has 4 goals, each aligned with a
SYSTEM
level of change. Figure 1 shows the child at
Vermont’s local and state-level early
local and state-level early
childhood policy and systems - Goal 4: The
childhood policy and system
the heart of the plan aligned with Goal 1: All
Early Childhood System will be Integrated,
Well Resourced and Data-informed.
Children Have a Healthy Start. The child is
nested within the family context and is aligned
COMMUNITY
with Goal 2: Families and Communities Play
early childhood services and resources
a Leading Role in Children’s Well-being. The
such as hospitals, food, child care,
Community - Goal 3: All Children and
schools, libraries, etc.
Families Have Access to High-Quality
third level is the broader community, which
Opportunities That Meet Their Needs.
has an array of services, supports and
resources for children and families, and is
aligned with Goal 2 and Goal 3: All Children
FAMILY
and Families Have Access to High-Quality
caregiver, teacher,
Family - Goal 2: Family and Community
other professional
Play a Leading Role in Children’s Well-being.
Opportunities That Meet Their Needs. Finally,
at the outermost level is Vermont’s local and
state policy and system, which represents
the larger policies and decisions that impact
Child - Goal 1: All Children Have a Healthy Start.
CHILD
all other layers aligned with Goal 4: The Early
Childhood System will be Integrated, Well
Resourced and Data-Informed.
Prenatal New Borns Infants Toddlers Preschoolers Kindergardeners 1st Graders 2nd Graders 3rd Graders

Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP) has 4 goals, each aligned with a level of change. The nested nature of
these layers indicates bidirectional relationships; when change happens at any level, it also has the ability to impact the layers
around it. Each goal of the VECAP ultimately seeks to improve outcomes for Vermont’s children and families at the heart of
Vermont’s Vision.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 3
1 
Full VECAP at https://bit.ly/VECAP2020
VECAP GOALS AT A GLANCE

ALL CHILDREN HAVE A HEALTHY START
1.
Children’s healthy development depends on their early experiences, their environment and the health
and well-being of their parents and caregivers. We know children are more likely to thrive when they live in safe
and stable home environments and when families have equitable access to resources when they need them.
To achieve this goal, Vermont will work to ensure all children prenatal through age eight are thriving across 4
primary domains: physical health, social and emotional wellness, developmental and educational results, and
adequate basic needs for a child to thrive.

FAMILIES & COMMUNITIES PLAY A LEADING ROLE
IN CHILDREN’S WELL-BEING
2.
Vermont’s families and communities need to be strong, resilient and have the capacity to identify and meet the
needs of children. A priority within this goal is to advance policies, and practices that honor and are supportive
of each family’s culture, strengths, structure, expertise, and preferences. Building a system that listens to the
needs of families, and creates space at the table to make decisions together, are core to success. To achieve
this goal, Vermont will work to create safe and stable home environments, economic stability, family friendly
workplace policies, parent and family leadership, and communities with social and physical infrastructure to
nurture resilient children and families.

ALL CHILDREN & FAMILIES HAVE ACCESS TO HIGH-QUALITY
OPPORTUNITIES THAT MEET THEIR NEEDS
3.
Vermont is invested in giving children the strongest start possible by creating resources and services that
are accessible, equitable and high-quality in the same 4 primary domains for children to thrive: physical
health, social and emotional wellness, developmental and educational results, and adequate basic needs
to improve family outcomes. Delivering quality services depends on a skilled and stable Early Childhood
workforce. Identifying inequities for vulnerable children and building strategies to counter systemic racism
and discrimination to create more equitable access to healthcare, mental health services, childcare, early
identification and intervention, education, and learning outcomes.

THE EARLY CHILDHOOD SYSTEM WILL BE INTEGRATED,
WELL RESOURCED & DATA-INFORMED
4.
Vermont is committed to building a seamless, equitable system of care and education for children and families.
Goal 4 has three related parts. The first requires collaborative leadership, coordination and communication
at all levels starting with aligned vision and language championed by agency and community leaders. This
leadership is essential to promote efficiencies and streamline systems to create a seamless experience for
families. The vision is to build greater coordination with every sector – including early care and education,
health, mental health, human services, housing, and the business community. The second part of Goal 4 is
to collect and report high quality data to understand how services, supports and resources are reaching the
kids and families they intend to, and to measure the extent strategies and investments are making the desired
impact. The third part is to leverage the integration and data to guide Vermont’s early childhood expenditures,
support efficient deployment of resources, and to increase public awareness about the value of investing in
children and the Early Childhood system.

4 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
MEASURING SUCCESS

In order to know whether Vermont has been successful in improving outcomes
across the Early Childhood system, indicators have been identified at each of the
4 layers of the system to monitor progress over time. Selected indicators by level
are below. The complete list of intermediate and 5-year indicators can be found
in the full VECAP document.

Indicators at the child level include increasing the percent of children who are flourishing (four
Child
standard characteristics), reducing the percent of low birth-weight infants, increasing the percent of
children reading at grade level by third grade, and reducing the number of children experiencing homelessness.

Indicators at the family level include increasing the number of child-serving programs that
Family
have adopted the Strengthening Families Approach, increasing the percent of children living
in a home where the family demonstrates resilience, and increasing the percent of children with a trusted
adult in their lives.

Indicators at the community level include increasing the number of families receiving home
Community
visiting services, monitoring the number of children served by Designated Mental Health
Agencies, decreasing the average age of identification/referral to Early Intervention, increasing the number of
children enrolled in Universal Prekindergarten Education, and increasing the percent of communities reporting
a strong physical infrastructure.

Unfortunately, no existing data currently captures integration outcomes within and across
System
Vermont’s Early Childhood service system. By 2026, Vermont will be able to measure integration
within the Early Childhood system, to identify resource allocation and whether decision-makers at all levels are
using data to inform decisions.

Accountability
The VECAP is a dynamic collective vision and plan, but accountability has been challenging to articulate and put into
practice. Frequently throughout the development of this action plan, members of focus groups and VECAP Committees
vocalized this struggle. The question of who is responsible for what, when and how is difficult to answer in a large
statewide system with a culture of ever-increasing engagement, and a structure of disparate stakeholders from both the
public and private sector.

All Early Childhood partners, including state agencies, community partners, and families will be held responsible for
working toward this vision by creating positive change in the Early Childhood system. Together, we will implement
this plan and hold each other accountable to the goals, objectives, strategies and outcomes identified within this plan.
The Building Bright Futures network infrastructure, including regional councils, VECAP committees and the
State Advisory Council will provide the accountability structure, support and monitoring.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 5
RECOMMENDATIONS & STRATEGIES

2020 RECOMMENDATIONS OF
THE BUILDING BRIGHT FUTURES
STATE ADVISORY COUNCIL
The State Advisory Council (SAC) is Vermont’s Governor-appointed, primary advisory body on the well-being of
children prenatal to age eight and their families. In partnership with Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP)
Committees and the Regional Council Network, the SAC sets priorities and the strategic direction for statewide
initiatives using the VECAP and up-to-date data. In 2019 and the start of 2020, the SAC worked to drive collective
action in Vermont in 2 key areas: (1) Early Childhood and Family Mental Health and (2) Workforce as a critical step
to build a high-quality, accessible Early Childhood system. Given the COVID-19 pandemic's exacerbation of gaps
and barriers faced by children and families statewide, as well as Vermont’s re-commitment to dispelling systemic
racism and social injustice, VECAP Committees and the SAC made 5 areas of policy recommendations.

1.
RECOGNIZE VERMONT’S EARLY CARE & EDUCATION SYSTEM & WORKFORCE AS ESSENTIAL

2.
MITIGATE COVID IMPACTS ON FAMILY ECONOMIC STABILITY & MENTAL HEALTH

3.
RECOGNIZE CHRONIC INEQUITIES & RACISM AS A PUBLIC HEALTH CRISIS

4.
EMPOWER FAMILY VOICE TO REBUILD A STRONGER SYSTEM

5.
EVOLVE OUR DATA SYSTEM TO ADDRESS GAPS

Historically, SAC recommendations have only focused on
legislative action. The SAC recognized that change must happen
SYSTEM
at every level to improve outcomes for children and families.
local and state-level early
childhood policy and system
Given the update to Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan and
in an attempt to draw concrete alignment across all of our work,
the 2020 SAC Recommendations seek to create meaningful
COMMUNITY
early childhood services and resources
change across four levels of Vermont’s Early Childhood
such as hospitals, food, child care,
schools, libraries, etc.
system: 1) child outcomes, 2) families and communities, 3)
Early Childhood agencies, service providers, etc., and 4) policy
makers (e.g. the legislature, Governor, etc.) (see Figure 1 on
FAMILY
page 6). Each recommendation identifies which level of the Early
caregiver, teacher,
other professional
Childhood system is targeted for change within the next year
and how it is aligned with Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan
(VECAP). The ultimate goal of all recommendations is to improve
CHILD
outcomes for children.

6 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
RECOGNIZE VERMONT’S EARLY
CARE & EDUCATION SYSTEM &
WORKFORCE AS ESSENTIAL
Why it Matters: A well-prepared, well-compensated ECE workforce is essential to both health and economic prosperity.
This was epitomized when the early care and education (ECE) workforce rose to the challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic,
stepping in to support children of essential workers and then reopening for all children in June. Teachers, directors, and staff
nimbly and safely responded to support wellness for all children and families, demonstrating the critical role they play in a
healthy VT infrastructure and economy. Further, families are depending on reliable access to high-quality early childhood
education and that is only possible with a well-qualified early education workforce. Scholarships support early childhood
educators who need and/or desire to increase their qualifications. For educators who have already accrued related educational
expenses, paying back student loans with wages at current levels is a barrier to employment in the field. A wage supplement
program will allow those who want to work in early childhood education to do so. Even before the COVID-19 crisis, Vermont
faced a severe shortage of early childhood educators and the problem will continue to get worse if Vermont does not invest
in this essential workforce. Immediate and sustainable action is needed to ensure an educated and stable early care and
education workforce exists to meet the needs of Vermont’s children, families and employers.

LEVELS REQUIRING ACTION > FAMILY, COMMUNITY, SYSTEM

RECOMMENDATION 1
Fund Education Costs, Compensation For Early Childhood
SYSTEM                         SYSTEM                         SYSTEM
local and state-level early                         local and state-level early                          local and state-level early
Education Workforce, Including Scholarships, Loan Repayment,
childhood policy and system                        childhood policy and system                        childhood policy and system
And Wage Supplementation:

Sufficiently fund and expand scholarship programs for early educators
>
COMMUNITY                      COMMUNITY                       COMMUNITY
early childhood services and resources                   early childhood services and resources                   early childhood services and resources
and maintain this revenue annually.
such as hospitals, food, child care,                     such as hospitals, food, child care,                      such as hospitals, food, child care,
schools, libraries, etc.                           schools, libraries, etc.                            schools, libraries, etc.
Establish a loan repayment program for early educators.
>
Establish a wage supplement program to progress toward adequate
>
FAMILY                           FAMILY                            FAMILY
compensation for early educators.
caregiver, teacher,                               caregiver, teacher,                                caregiver, teacher,
other professional                               other professional                                other professional
Prioritize workforce development and hazard pay for this sector.
>

CHILD                            CHILD                            CHILD
RECOMMENDATION 2
Continue Investment In Redesigning The State’s Child Care Financial Assistance
Program (CCFAP) By Making Progress In Alignment With Year 3 Of The State’s
5-Year Plan, Including:
Increase the CCFAP rate paid to early care and education providers so those reimbursement rates closely reflect the true cost of
>
high-quality care thereby reducing the burden on early care and education programs to subsidize the system through low wages
and other cost-saving efforts.

Fully support needed investments in the technology system(s), staff and resources required to implement the redesigned CCFAP
>
structure and providing an accessible platform for families, educators, and administrators.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 7
RECOMMENDATIONS & STRATEGIES

MITIGATE COVID-19 IMPACTS
ON FAMILY ECONOMIC STABILITY
& MENTAL HEALTH
Why it Matters: Early childhood mental health is the foundation of all future child development. Positive environments
with stable and responsive relationships build a strong foundation which shapes a child’s ability to make friends, cope
with adversity, and achieve success in school, work and community.

The COVID-19 pandemic has created many sources of stress and anxiety for parents of young children across the country
and created new barriers for people already suffering from mental illness and substance use disorders. Concerns about
health, combined with uncertainty over unemployment and finances, work, and access to food and other resources are
all contributing to increasing stress among parents and caregivers. Uncertainties over child care during the pandemic
are also contributing to stress for many parents. While there are new opportunities for learning due to both children and
parents spending more time together in the home, stress and anxiety may be exacerbated as well.

Decades of neglect and underinvestment in addressing people’s mental health needs have been exposed by the COVID-19
pandemic that must be addressed urgently. The healthier parents and caregivers are, the greater the capacity to stay
calm under pressure and support their children’s emotional development. Adults involved in the lives of infants, toddlers,
and preschoolers must be provided with the capacity, knowledge, and training to promote optimal social and emotional
development by mitigating the pandemic’s impact and strengthening service provision through flexible funding.

LEVEL REQUIRING ACTION > SYSTEM

RECOMMENDATION 1
SYSTEM                         SYSTEM                         SYSTEM
Mitigate The Health And Economic Effects Of
local and state-level early                          local and state-level early                         local and state-level early
childhood policy and system                         childhood policy and system                        childhood policy and system
The Pandemic On Families:
Extend economic support beyond expiration of CARES Act funds that
>
COMMUNITY                       COMMUNITY                      COMMUNITY
expire in December.
early childhood services and resources                    early childhood services and resources                   early childhood services and resources
such as hospitals, food, child care,                      such as hospitals, food, child care,                     such as hospitals, food, child care,
schools, libraries, etc.                            schools, libraries, etc.                           schools, libraries, etc.
Extend flexibility in eligibility for programs (e.g. Reach Up work
>
requirements) so parents can engage in other activities that help them
invest in their future and integral to the health and well-being of their family.
FAMILY                            FAMILY                           FAMILY
caregiver, teacher,                                caregiver, teacher,                               caregiver, teacher,
other professional                                other professional                               other professional
RECOMMENDATION 2
Sustain And Strengthen The Integration Of Mental Health Services
For Children And Families Through Flexible Funding For Integrated
CHILD                             CHILD                            CHILD

Mental Health Across Settings:
Continue to allow telehealth to be covered by insurance so families can access the care they need.
>
Invest in flexible service delivery and availability.
>
Focus on mental health prevention and staff burnout across many settings.
>

8 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
RECOGNIZE CHRONIC
INEQUITIES & RACISM
AS A PUBLIC HEALTH CRISIS
Why it Matters: At the same time that family life has been upended in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Vermonters
have mobilized to respond to address systemic racism across the country. In May 2020, George Floyd was murdered
in Minneapolis by a police officer who knelt on his neck for over eight minutes. For those who live and work with the
comfort of racial and systemic privilege, this death brought the experiences of Black, Indigenous and people of color
(BIPOC) at the hands of the police into renewed focus and pushed countless Vermonters and Vermont institutions to
evaluate their role in ending racism. In visioning what an anti-racist approach to social change might look like for the
EC system in Vermont, Building Bright Futures released a statement committing to address these issues, which was
formally endorsed by Vermont's Early Childhood State Advisory Council on June 22nd, 2020:

“[It is] our responsibility to personally and organizationally explore implicit biases, unconscious racism and
actions that contribute to racial inequities. The personal commitment our team has made will better prepare us
to be effective stewards to apply a racial equity and economic justice lens to our policies and practices in order
to collectively, as an Early Childhood system, make overdue changes for a stronger, more equitable, Vermont. The
threats of racism are not new; we recognize many of our existing systems are built on a history of oppression,
however we are now stepping up to answer the call to action. Our commitment to positive change will not just be
in reaction to current events, but as a part of our ongoing work in the Early Childhood system by integrating and
weaving a focus of diversity, equity, social justice and inclusion into our personal lives and all of our work.”

It is critical to elevate the focus on equity for Vermont’s young children and their families, recognizing that during the
early childhood years, the effects of racism and poverty can have profound impacts which shape health throughout life.

LEVELS REQUIRING ACTION > FAMILY, COMMUNITY, SYSTEM

RECOMMENDATION 1
SYSTEM                         SYSTEM                         SYSTEM
Partner With Vermont’s Racial Equity Task Force To
local and state-level early                         local and state-level early                          local and state-level early
childhood policy and system                        childhood policy and system                        childhood policy and system
Identify And Build Structures Of Support For Racially
Diverse Populations And Address Health Disparities And
Systemic Impacts Of Racism.
COMMUNITY                      COMMUNITY                       COMMUNITY
early childhood services and resources                   early childhood services and resources                   early childhood services and resources
such as hospitals, food, child care,                     such as hospitals, food, child care,                      such as hospitals, food, child care,
schools, libraries, etc.                           schools, libraries, etc.                            schools, libraries, etc.

RECOMMENDATION 2
Align And Integrate Equity Initiatives To Leverage Impact
FAMILY                           FAMILY                            FAMILY
caregiver, teacher,                               caregiver, teacher,                                caregiver, teacher,
And Expertise Across Sectors And Early Childhood Partners
other professional                               other professional                                other professional
To Inform Strategies In The Vermont Early Childhood
Action Plan And Early Childhood System.
CHILD                            CHILD                            CHILD

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 9
RECOMMENDATIONS & STRATEGIES

EMPOWER FAMILY
VOICE TO REBUILD
A STRONGER SYSTEM
Why it Matters: Family knowledge, values, beliefs, and cultural backgrounds should always be incorporated into the
planning and delivery of policies and services. Providing parents and caregivers opportunities to express thoughts and
concerns, and partnering in systems conversations and decision-making processes, contributes to an Early Childhood
system that mirrors the diverse needs of Vermont families. It also provides children and future generations the opportunity
to have a voice and be leaders in the creation of the system instead of solely being consumers of resources, services
and supports. Such partnership ensures families become leaders in designing a responsive system that works for them.

LEVELS REQUIRING ACTION > FAMILY, COMMUNITY, SYSTEM

RECOMMENDATION 1
Increase Opportunities For Parent And Caregiver Representatives
SYSTEM                         SYSTEM                         SYSTEM
To Serve On Committees, Legislatively Mandated Study Sections
local and state-level early                         local and state-level early                          local and state-level early
childhood policy and system                        childhood policy and system                        childhood policy and system
And Decision Making Bodies To Inform Local And State Policy,
Practice And Resource Allocation:
COMMUNITY                      COMMUNITY                       COMMUNITY
Require each legislatively mandated board/committee/study section have
early childhood services and resources                   early childhood services and resources                   early childhood services and resources
>
such as hospitals, food, child care,                     such as hospitals, food, child care,                      such as hospitals, food, child care,
at least 1 parent representative with lived experience.
schools, libraries, etc.                           schools, libraries, etc.                            schools, libraries, etc.

RECOMMENDATION 2
FAMILY                           FAMILY                            FAMILY
caregiver, teacher,                               caregiver, teacher,                                caregiver, teacher,
Commit To Ensuring That Children And Families Are In All Policies:
other professional                               other professional                                other professional

Similar to the “health in all policies” initiative, this recommendation is based on
>
incorporating child development and family well-being considerations into all
CHILD                            CHILD                            CHILD
decision-making across sectors and policy areas.

At the state-agency and community-based partners level, and at the policy-making level,
>
review programs, policies and legislation to ensure that revisions and requirements consider
the impact and consequences to child development and family well-being.

This is the one place I feel my voice is heard and it matters.
- Parent Member of the BBF VECAP Families & Communities Committee

10 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
EVOLVE OUR
DATA SYSTEM TO
ADDRESS GAPS
Why it Matters: Vermont has recommitted to using evidence and data to inform service provision and policy.
Consequently, Vermont must prioritize and invest in Early Childhood data systems to support optimal outcomes for
children and families. Strong cross-sector data linkages will allow decision-makers to understand the long-term impact
and return on investment for Early Childhood services and programs. Currently, Vermont’s EC databases are inadequate
in providing a full picture of child and family outcomes and how the area of services supports better outcomes. Not only
is the existing technological infrastructure inadequate, Vermont hasn’t prioritized personnel time necessary to support
data infrastructure or the partnerships required to execute high quality data systems at all levels (e.g. supporting quality,
timely and accurate data collection, data cleaning, and producing reports, summaries and visualizations).

The ultimate goal is for Vermont to invest in high quality data systems which includes financial investment in a single,
unified database and resources that work for the Early Childhood system and more broadly, Vermont, ensuring adequate
staffing resources (at the state and local level) to support data collection, processing and analysis, and committing to
data-informed policy decisions.

LEVELS REQUIRING ACTION > FAMILY, COMMUNITY, SYSTEM

RECOMMENDATION 1
Restart And Support The Early Childhood Data Governance Council
SYSTEM                         SYSTEM                         SYSTEM
And Utilize The BBF Data And Evaluation Committee To Identify
local and state-level early                         local and state-level early                          local and state-level early
childhood policy and system                        childhood policy and system                        childhood policy and system
And Elevate Data Gaps And Align Priorities Through Cross-Sector
Collaboration.
COMMUNITY                      COMMUNITY                       COMMUNITY
early childhood services and resources                   early childhood services and resources                   early childhood services and resources
such as hospitals, food, child care,                     such as hospitals, food, child care,                      such as hospitals, food, child care,
schools, libraries, etc.                           schools, libraries, etc.                            schools, libraries, etc.
RECOMMENDATION 2
Promote Data Literacy And Using Data To Inform Policy Across
Sectors By Educating Vermonters About The Importance Of
FAMILY                           FAMILY                            FAMILY
High-Quality Data Collection, Reporting And Integration.
caregiver, teacher,                               caregiver, teacher,                                caregiver, teacher,
other professional                               other professional                                other professional

RECOMMENDATION 3
CHILD                            CHILD                            CHILD
Fully Fund Existing Early Childhood Data Initiatives To Fidelity:
Early Childhood Information System (E.g. Bright Futures Information System,
Children’s Integrated Services) And The State Longitudinal Data System.

RECOMMENDATION 4
Create An Early Childhood Budget That Identifies All Financial Sources Dedicated To Children And Their
Families From Prenatal To Age Eight To Monitor, Align And Leverage Financial Resources.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 11
SPOTLIGHT

COVID-19 DATA SPOTLIGHT
Recognizing that the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted the Early
Childhood data landscape, this section shines a light on the most up to
date data and how the EC system has responded to meet the evolving
needs of children and families. The decision to separate COVID-19 related
data from the main chapter content was intentional as 2020 data will be
an outlier and may not be comparable to previous years.

The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted needs and gaps across the Early Childhood system including access to housing, health,
nutrition, transportation, income, child care, mental health, and education, especially for children and families of color, those for
whom English is a second language, those with lesser incomes, children with special health care needs (CSHCN) and those in
more rural geographic locations.

Food Security
As can be seen in Figure 2, the percent of food insecure children under 18 has risen from 2018 in every Vermont County
9 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic.Vermont has been quick to act in adapting school meal programs to meet the needs of
all children under 18 regardless of income or school enrollment in accordance with the USDA out of school time meal
program guidelines from the start of the pandemic in March 2020 through June 2021.

9 
Figure 2Food Insecure Children Under 18 by County | 2018 vs 2020 (projected)
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
28.1
28
%
%
%
27.4
%
25.6
25.3
%
25.3
%
%
24.8
%
%
%
%
%
22.5
22.4
%
22.5
%
%
%
20.4
19.5
%
19
19.6
19.3
%
%
17.8
17.5
17.8
%
17.2
16.8
15.5
16.1
15.6
%
15
12.3
13.1
12.6
11.8
Of Food Insecure Children


%
Lamoille Essex Orleans Windham Bennington Caledonia Rutland Washington Windsor Orange Grand Isle Addison Chittenden Franklin

Housing
To reduce the risk of spreading COVID-19 in congregate settings, Vermont families staying in group shelters were moved to
motels. As a result, the number of children under 18 staying in Vermont’s Publicly Funded Homeless Shelters decreased
10
sharply from 1,102 in 2018 to 682 in 2020.

Families seeking services
In addition to local and regional mutual aid efforts connecting community members in need of resources to services and
individuals, Help Me Grow Vermont reported that calls from families seeking support increased by 600% during the
11
period from March 15 through June.

Child Protection
The number of children under 9 in out-of-home custody fell from 659 in 2019 to 541 in 2020 as of the September 30th point in
12 
time count. As can be seen in Figure 3, the number of calls to the Child Protection Hotline fell month over month during the
13 
stay home stay safe order.Anecdotally, with many children not participating in their traditional care and community settings,
mandated reporters may not have had contact or ‘eyes on’ children to monitor their safety or to report potential abuse or neglect.

12 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
13 
Child Care
Figure 3Number of Calls to the Child Protection
Hotline 2019 vs 2020 Weekly Comparison
The COVID-19 pandemic has only complicated the already
dire struggle to secure high-quality, affordable child care
600
for Vermont’s youngest and most vulnerable children and
500
14
their families. The August CDD survey found that:
400
• 76% of the programs were already open while 2%
300
responded that they were closed and not reopening.
200
• 70% of the children attending programs had been
100
enrolled before, 18% had never attended any child care
0
1 2 3 4
1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4
program before, and 12% had attended a different program.
MAY
MARCH
APRIL

In response to Governor Scott’s directive to set up school-
2020 Total 2019 Total
age child care hubs in order for families to be able to
return to work, Vermont Afterschool and the Department
Early Childhood & Family Mental Health
for Children and Families were able to identify and support
As can be seen inFigures 17 and 18 on page 22, both
40 hub programs with 84 sites for a total capacity of
the number of children served by Designated
almost 5,000 students during remote learning days and
Agencies (DAs) and those receiving crisis services
16
out of school hours.
remained relatively stable in2020. These rates are not
reflective of the need described by communities and
Schools
families across Vermont or the availability of support
In September 2020, 58% of schools operated in a hybrid
through DAs. Results of an August survey from the Child
model with both in person and remote instruction, 15% were
14 
Development Division (CDD) from 559 of 1,096 child
17 
fully remote, and 27% were fully in person. Disparities in
care programs found that several of the following
digital connectivity while previously a hardship, have meant
challenging behaviors have emerged in young children:
limited or disrupted access to education.
struggling with problem solving; increased sensory
sensitivity; struggling with transitions; regression in
Vermont’s Commitment to Supporting Children,
toileting; struggle following directions; and trouble getting
Families & the Early Childhood System
along with peers.
While the long-term effects of this pandemic are unknown,
Immunizations
the disruption to regular schedules of health, education,
and developmental services may have lasting effects on
As can be seen in Figure 4, in March, April, May and August
child outcomes; as will the economic impact on families,
of 2020, there were far fewer vaccine doses given to children
communities and the State. Vermont’s children, families,
between 4 and 6 years than in the corresponding months of
15 
and professionals across sectors have demonstrated
2019. Routine care and immunizations are a key strategy
strength and resilience through this public health crisis.
for prevention of disease and promotion of well-being.
Vermont is committed to supporting each and every child
15 
Vaccine Doses Reported by Month: Children 4-6 Yrs
Figure 4
and family using the Vermont Early Childhood Action Plan
2019 
2020
(VECAP) as a vision and guide.

1617
1453
1247
1347
1238
1237
1252
1227
There truly is no area
1160
849
that the COVID-19 pandemic
583
has not touched for children
246
and families.
MAR APR MAY JUNE JULY AUG

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 13
DEMOGRAPHICS

The following chapters include key indicators of child and family well-being, many of which show trends over time. Indicators
show a snapshot of the status of children and families, but may not reflect the entire context impacting outcomes. It is important
to note that much of this data is from 2018 and 2019 and therefore does not reflect the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. For an
overview of the impact of COVID-19 on Vermont children and families, please see the COVID-19 Data Spotlight on page 12.

DEMOGRAPHICS
Who are Vermont’s young children? How many are there? Where do
they live? These factors are important to take into consideration when
crafting policy and designing programs for children and families.

It is no secret that Vermont’s population is aging and
64% of Vermont’s children under age 18 live in two-parent
households, with the remaining third living in single parent
shrinking. The total number of children born each year in
households (26%), with relatives (7%), in foster homes
Vermont has been declining since the 1980s. In 2018, 5,432
19
(2.5%), or in group quarters (0.5%).
babies were born to Vermont residents. The age of females
giving birth has shifted along with national trends. Between
Although the vast majority of Vermont’s population identify
2013 and 2018 the fertility rate (births per 1,000 females by
as white, the state is growing more racially diverse, especially
age) of teen females has fallen from 14.7 to 8.8, while the
in young children. Table 1 shows the percentage of the
fertility rate among females ages 35 to 44 has risen from
population under 10 who identify as two or more races or
18
27.7 to 30.3.
multiracial (4.3%), is more than twice that of the Vermont
population as a whole (1.9%). Similarly, 2.7% of children
Accordingly, the number of children under the age of 9 is
under 10 identify as Hispanic or Latino compared with 1.9%
in decline. Figure 5 shows that in 2018, there were 54,622
20
of the population as a whole.
children under 9 compared with 57,079 in 2013, a 4.3%
decrease over 5 years. Vermont’s population of young
children is not evenly spread across the state. Similar
20 
Table 1 Distribution of Children Under 10 Years &
to the population as a whole, over 55% of Vermont’s
Total Population by Race & Ethnicity (2018)
children are concentrated in four regions: Franklin and
Grand Isle, Central Vermont, Rutland, and Chittenden.
The Chittenden region alone is home to 25% of Vermont
Racial Distribution   Children   Population
3
children under 9.
Under 10 

American Indian
3 
0.2%
0.3%
Estimated No. of Children (by Age Group 2010-2018)
Figure 5
or Alaska Native

Asian
1.6%
1.7%
6 to 8 Yrs
Under 3 Yrs   3 to 5 Yrs

Black or African
2%
1.3%
American
21000
20500
0.4%
0.7%
Other Race
20000
19500
19000
Two or More Races
4.3%
1.9%
18500
18000
White
91.2%
94.3%
17500
17000
Hispanic or Latino
2.7%
1.9%
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

14 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
BASIC NEEDS

: 
VECAP GOAL 1 
ALL CHILDREN
BASIC NEEDS
HAVE A HEALTHY START
Can children and families meet their
basic needs? How many children are
homeless? Do children and families
have enough food to eat?

The stress of being unable to meet the basic physiological
Vermont Basic Needs Budget
needs of food and shelter, often due to poverty, impacts the
The reality is that the Federal Poverty Level is not a measure
ability of parents and caregivers to create an environment
of family economic well-being. Many Vermonters earning
where children can thrive. Chronic poverty can lead to a wide
well above the FPL struggle to cover the cost of basic needs
range of challenges for children and families, negatively
such as housing, transportation, and healthcare. Every two
affecting their physical and social emotional health and
years the Joint Fiscal Office develops a Basic Needs Budget,
development, and their ability to learn and be successful in
detailing the actual costs of living in Vermont. The 2019
school and beyond.
Basic Needs Budget calculates that a two-adult, two-child
household with both adults working would need to make
The Federal Poverty Level
$84,736, (or $20.37 per hour per wage earner) to meet
The Federal Poverty Level (FPL) is a national guideline used to
their household needs. Figure 7 shows that this is almost
determine eligibility for programs and services. For example,
double the income of 2 adults making minimum wage
to be eligible for 3SquaresVT (SNAP) the household income
($10.78 in Vermont), and more than three times higher than
21 
must be less than 185% of the FPL. In 2018, the FPL for a
24
the Federal Poverty Level.
22 
family of four was $25,100. Since 2012, Vermont’s families
24 
with young children have seen a reduction in poverty, but, as
Figure 7 Vermont Basic Needs Budget Compared to
shown in Figure 6, children under five with single mothers
Other Benchmarks for Two Working Parents & Two Children
experience poverty at almost four times the rate of all
23
families (40.1% vs. 11.5%).
$92,495
$84,736 
23 
Children Under 5 Years Living in Households
Figure 6
with Incomes Below the Federal Poverty Level (2018)
$43,680
SINGLE PARENT (female head of household)
40.1%
$25,100
Full-Time at VT
Federal              2018 Basic    VT Median
ALL FAMILIES 
11.5%
Minimum Wage
Poverty Level            Needs, Budget,   Family Income
(Two Wage Earners 2018)
(Family of 4 2018)                            (4 person adj to 2017 dollars)
Rural

Early Childhood partners involved in BBF Regional Councils continue to be concerned for
children and families' access to basic needs. Councils bring together partners across sectors
to strategize, coordinate, and implement responses. Read more starting on page 29.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 15
BASIC NEEDS

the rate for the US has dropped from 17% in 2017 to 15% in
FOOD SECURITY
25
2018 while Vermont has only dropped from 16% to 15%.
One way to examine the ability of Vermonters to meet
COVID-19 specific food security data can be found in the
their basic needs is through the lens of food security. Food
COVID-19 Data Spotlight on page 12.
insecurity is defined as an economic and social condition of
25 
Children who
limited or uncertain access to adequate food.
Of the 15% of children living in food insecure
live with food insecurity may struggle to pay attention and be
households, approximately 7,700 (44%) are not
successful in school and learning environments. They may
eligible for federal nutrition programs due to their
also face immediate and long-term risks to their physical
households having incomes above 185% of the federal
25 
and mental health, including chronic disease, depression,
poverty level. Vermont has worked to address this
suicide, nutritional deficiencies, and obesity. When families
gap through school and out-of-school-time meal
have to choose between competing needs, families often
programs including covering the cost of reduced
choose to reduce or “stretch” their food budget in order to
price meal eligible children, beginning the ‘Breakfast
pay rent, the electric bill, or other less flexible expenses.
after the Bell’ program, and expanding universal meal
26
programs to many schools.
In 2018 in Vermont, 17,550, or more than 1 in 7 children
under 18, live in households that are food insecure. While
Other efforts to address food security in Vermont include
Vermont has typically fared better than the nation as a whole
3SquaresVT, Vermont’s Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
on measures of food insecurity, this is no longer the case as
Program (SNAP), which served 21,815 children under
18 in 11,140 households with an average benefit of $363
27 
in December of 2019. The federal WIC program served
1 in 7 children under 18 live
11,300 pregnant women, infants, and children in 2019,
in households that are food
constituting approximately 62.4% of eligible participants.
insecure, 44% of whom are
There are approximately 6,700 additional people who are
28 
likely ineligible for federal
eligible for WIC, but are not enrolled.
Vermont has prioritized
nutrition programs.
increasing enrollment. See page 42 for a promising pilot in
the Springfield Area region.

HOUSING
Stable housing is a key support to provide children with a positive environment to learn and grow. However, the cost and
availability of housing is another significant challenge Vermont families face when trying to meet their basic needs. 47% of
family households who rent and 30% of households who own report paying more than 30% of their income toward rent or
29 
a mortgage, a common metric of affordability. The average Vermont renter makes $13.81 an hour and can afford to spend
30
$718 per month on rent, but the average two bedroom apartment averages $1,215 per month.

16 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
Transportation
Children Experiencing Homelessness
Although not a physiological need like food or housing, 70%
When housing challenges become overwhelming, families
34 
of Vermont’s children live in rural areas making access
may become homeless. The McKinney-Vento Homelessness
to reliable transportation a necessity. However, low-income
Assistance Act defines homeless as lacking a fixed, regular,
families often rely on older, less-efficient, higher-polluting
and adequate nighttime residence which includes sharing the
vehicles with higher maintenance costs and detrimental
housing of other persons, living in temporary housing, and
economic and environmental impacts. For those who need
31
places not designed for regular sleeping accommodation.
or want to get around without a car, existing fixed-route public
During the 2019-2020 school year, there were 373 children
transit is not accessible or flexible enough to consistently get
32
under 9 who met this definition enrolled in school.
rural residents to work, child care, and other services.
To address these challenges, the Family Supportive
Connectivity
Housing (FSH) program through the Vermont Department
Another long-standing challenge for Vermonters is digital
for Children and Families (DCF) “provides intensive case
connectivity. Connectivity challenges appear in part, due
management and service coordination to homeless
to the rural nature of Vermont, but also because of access
families with children, following evidence-based practice
and affordability of the internet, and limited capacity and
for housing families with complex needs and multiple
number of devices. While these challenges might have
systems involvement.” In 2019, FSH served 210 families
previously been a hardship, now connectivity is a necessity.
33
with 238 children under the age of six.
With many services, resources, and supports moving into a
As seen in Figure 8, the number of children under the age of
virtual space due to the COVID-19 pandemic, families unable
18 in publicly funded homeless shelters decreased in 2019,
to connect digitally have limited or no access to education,
attributed in part to decreased capacity in emergency shelters
telehealth, and socialization. Broadband access across the
10 
for families. COVID-19 specific homelessness data can be
state varies and is largely aligned with population density,
36
found in the COVID-19 Data Spotlight on page 12.
with higher density areas having higher levels of access.

10 
Figure 8 No. of Children in Vermont's Publicly Funded Homeless Shelters 2011-2019

838 952 807 891 857 880 1,095 1,102 888

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 17
RESILIENT FAMILIES & COMMUNITIES

: 
VECAP GOAL 2 ALL FAMILIES &
COMMUNITIES PLAY A LEADING ROLE
Resilient Families
IN CHILDREN’S WELL-BEING.
& Communities
A child’s sense of who they are and how to interact
with the world depends on the quality and stability of
their relationships with families and communities.

Toxic Stress and Resilience
Living in strong families within supportive communities provides the foundation for long-term child health and well-being
and the ability to overcome adversity. However, toxic stress can affect anyone, and children are no exception. When children
experience trauma and toxic stress in their early years, it can negatively impact their current and long-term physical and
mental health if not buffered by nurturing and supportive relationships.

Toxic stress, and resilience; the capacity to thrive, individually and collectively, in the face of adversity - are difficult to measure.
Below are three indicators that Vermont is currently using to inform policy and practice.

The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) score is one of the most common indicators used to measure exposure to
toxic stress and childhood adversity. In Vermont, over one quarter of children under 9 experience at least one adverse
childhood experience (see Figure 9). The four most common ACEs in Vermont are living in a home where it is hard to cover
basic needs (18%), experiencing the divorce of a parent or guardian (17%), living with someone with substance use disorder
36 
(9%), and living with someone who has a serious mental health challenge (6%). Of note, this measure fails to account for
factors which mitigate or exacerbate toxic stress.

The Flourishing indicator from the National Survey of Children’s Health measures characteristics of children that are
associated with resilience. Parents and caregivers are asked whether their young children (6 months to 5 years) 1) are
affectionate and tender, 2) if they bounce back quickly when things don’t go their way, 3) if they show interest and curiosity
in learning new things, and 4) if they smile and laugh a lot. As can be seen in Figure 10, 1 in 3 of Vermont’s children six
37 
months to 5 years exhibit two or fewer flourishing characteristics. For older children (6-8) that number jumps to more
38
than half (54%) of children who meet either one or no flourishing characteristics. 

36 37 
Adverse Childhood Experiences          Figure 10 Flourishing Characteristics
Figure 9
for Children Under 9                   for Children 6 Months to 5 Yrs

None                             Meets 0-2 items
8%
32%
46%
1 or 2                             Meets 3 items

3 or more                           Meets all 4 items
26%
66%
22%

The Child and Adolescent Needs and Strengths (CANS) assessment is in use for children involved with DCF and will soon
include all children being served by Designated Agencies. Of children assessed in Vermont in 2019, 89% have a history of
39
trauma, 40% report having a connection to their community, and just over half report having a stable caregiver in their lives.

18 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
: 
ResilienceThe capacity to thrive, individually and collectively, in the face of adversity.

Division (FSD) staff between 2014 and 2017, about 50% of the
Child Safety
children from this age group came into custody because of
Another indicator of the adversity faced by Vermont’s young
opioid abuse in their families. This number decreased to 41%
children is the rate of children in protective custody. When a
40
in 2018 and 40% in 2019, which is an encouraging trend.”
child’s safety is threatened, the DCF-Family Services Division
2020 child protection data can be found in the COVID-19 Data
becomes involved. In 2019, 20,498 child abuse and neglect
Spotlight starting on page 12.
intakes (calls to the child protection hotline) resulted in 2,682
40 
Another indicator of child safety is the number of Vermont
assessments and 3,405 investigations. The result of these
children exposed to domestic violence. According to the Vermont
interventions may include ongoing DCF involvement in one
Network Against Domestic and Sexual Violence, in 2019 1,376
of the following types of cases: DCF custody, family support,
children and youth connected with an advocate for help with
or conditional custody, as seen in Table 2.
41
abuse toward a family member or toward themselves.
40 
Table 2 Caseload by Type Of DCF Involvement
Strengthening Families
DCF Protective Custody: The child is placed with a
Vermont’s Early Childhood system values prevention and
1,239
relative or foster family 
intervening to support children and families as early as possible.
2 0 1 9


Examples of Vermont’s commitment to prevention and building
Family Support: DCF provides support to families
I N
481
without court involvement


family resilience include adopting the Strengthening Families
Approach (see Figure 12) and the Vermont Resilience Mapping
Conditional Custody: The child is in the custody of a parent
754
or relative with DCF supervision & services to ensure the child's safety
project. The Strengthening Families Approach is based on five
C A S E S
protective factors ‘to increase family strengths, enhance child
Data Note: Custody Cases and Conditional Custody cases are reflective of
a child count, whereas the Family Support Cases is a family count. Includes
development and reduce the likelihood of child abuse and
children of all ages.
42 
neglect’.The Vermont Resilience Mapping project is working
to build a coordinated statewide approach to foster resilience
As can be seen in Figure 11, after increasing from 2012 to 2016,
for all individuals and communities through consistent shared
the number of children in custody has remained relatively
messaging and integrated communications across the Early
steady for children under age 9 from 2017 to 2019 ranging
Childhood system informed by parents and caregivers.
from a total of 618 to 659. According to DCF, “The number of
children, aged 0-5, in DCF custody remains high as a result of
42 
Figure 12Strengthening Families 5 Protective Factors
the opioid crisis. Based on data collected from Family Services

Enhancing
40 
parental resilience
Figure 11 Count of Children in DCF Protective
Custody by Age
0 to 2 3 to 5 6 to 8

800

198
174
600
172
178
170
Providing an array of              Providing parents
concrete resources
social connections
240
117
251
in times of need
235
228
400
200
154
100
75
283
112
124
200
270
257
248
246
238
174
Facilitating
144
Supporting healthy social
knowledge of parenting
0
& emotional development
COUNT OF CHILDREN UNDER 9 IN DCF
& child development
in young children
2017 
2013 
2019
2016   2018
2012 20142015

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 19
HEALTH & WELL-BEING

HEALTH &
WELL-BEING
Healthy child development depends on a
child’s early experiences and environmental
factors such as access to health care and
support from pregnancy onward, as well as
: 
VECAP GOAL 1 ALL CHILDREN
Social Determinants of Health.
HAVE A HEALTHY START

Vermont emphasizes well-child visits: routine healthcare
Social Determinants of Health
visits held when the child is healthy, which allow the provider
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and parent to focus on a child’s wellness and development,
(CDC), “Social determinants of health (SDOH) are conditions in
preventing future health problems. 89% of children under 6
the places where people live, learn, work, and play that affect a
have seen a healthcare provider at least once during the last
43 
wide range of health risks and outcomes.”Vermont’s holistic
46
year for any kind of medical care.
approach to early childhood well-being recognizes that we
all have a role to play in ensuring the health of our children
As can be seen in Figure 13, Vermont children ages 3 to 8
by improving these social factors. Strategies like integrating
regularly see the dentist for preventive care. Vermont also
screenings and conversations into well-child and prenatal
recognizes the importance of oral health for very young
health visits, and innovative programs like Developmental
children and has initiated efforts to increase preventive
47
Understanding and Legal Collaboration for Everyone (DULCE)
dental care visits for children under 3.
that place social support workers in primary care practices, help
47 
lay the foundation for healthy development.
Children Under 9 Yrs Who Had 1 or More Preventive
Figure 13
Dental Care Visits During the Past 12 Months by Age
Health Access
Vermont children have some of the best access to healthcare in
the US, with 97% percent of children under 18 having some type
87.9%
44 
85.5%
of health insurance.80% of families report that insurance for
their children is adequate with reasonable out-of-pocket costs,
benefits that meet their children’s needs, and the ability to seek
45
medical care when necessary.
31.1%
Vermont families take advantage of this access by regularly
going to their pediatrician or family doctor for their young
3 to 5 YRS
1 to 2 YRS             6 to 8 YRS
children, which supports overall healthy child development.

Immunizations
Another measure of health and well-being for young children is the rate of immunization. Receiving the full series of recommended
immunizations shields children against 14 preventable diseases. Vaccinations also help protect vulnerable people from the risk of
disease, especially infants who are too young to be vaccinated, and children and adults whose immune systems are weaker.In 2019,
three-quarters (76.4%) of Vermont children received their recommended immunizations by age two. However, rates differed by
48
county from a high of 81.5% in Orange County to a low of 59.6% in Essex County.

20 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
PRE & POSTNATAL HEALTH
The foundation of child and family health starts before birth. The period
during and immediately following pregnancy is a key time for a child’s
long-term development and the well-being of both mother and child.

A substance-free pregnancy increases the health of a baby.
Almost all women had at least
Cigarette smoking was the most common form of substance
49
one prenatal visit and 92% of
use during pregnancy in 2018 (Figure 15).
49
women had a postpartum visit.
Figure 16 shows the rate of infants born with a diagnosis of drug
withdrawal syndrome. In 2014, Vermont hit a peak rate of 35.7
per 1,000 live births, but has since dropped below the 2010 rates
Healthcare Visits
50 
18 
to 24 per 1,000 live births. Vermont is committed to ongoing
For the 5,432 Vermont babies born in 2018,79% of women
systems of care for screening and diagnosis of substance use
had a visit with a healthcare provider in the year before
disorder in pregnancy and communities are working together to
pregnancy. However, only 33% of women discussed getting
provide treatment and supportive care for these disorders.
pregnant at this visit (Figure 14). 34% of births resulted from
unintended pregnancies. A bright spot is almost all women
49 
Figure 15 Substance Use During Pregnancy (2018 Births)
had at least one prenatal visit and 92% of women had a
49
postpartum visit.

49 
Pre & Postnatal Healthcare Visits (2018 Births)
Figure 14
14%   13%   11%   4%
33%
PRECONCEPTION VISIT

OTHER
CIGARETTE         ALCOHOL    MAT
PRENATAL VISIT
100%
SUBSTANCE
SMOKING

POSTPARTUM VISIT
92%
Breastfeeding
Breastfeeding helps prevent obesity and diabetes in
Prenatal Substance Use
children, and puts mothers at lower risk for breast and
Supporting the reduction of women’s use of harmful
ovarian cancer, diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular
substances during pregnancy has been one of Vermont’s key
disease. While Vermont has high rates of initiation (90% in
public health initiatives in recent years. This includes tobacco,
2016), exclusive breastfeeding is sustained until 6 months
51
alcohol, marijuana, and other substances during pregnancy.
at a much lower rate (37%).

50 
Figure 16Newborns with Drug Withdrawal Syndrome 2008-2018
17.1 22.6 26.6 28.0 31.3 34.6 35.7 34.3 28.3 29.6 24.0

2008  2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 21
HEALTH & WELL-BEING

term residential treatment. Since 2000, Vermont’s mental
Early Childhood and Family Mental Health
health system has seen a consistent increase in the number
Mental health is a crucial part of overall health and well-
of young children accessing routine services from Designated
being. Early childhood and family mental health refers to
52 
(Figure 17). While the use of crisis
Mental Health Agencies
the social, emotional, and behavioral well-being of young
services is not as high as the number of children being served
children and their families. This includes the capacity to
by Designated Agencies, there has been a striking increase
experience, regulate and express emotion, form close, secure
since 2017 (Figure 18). Although presented here, 2020 data
relationships, and to explore the environment and learn.
may be an outlier due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Of note,
Optimal family mental health allows children to develop the
data is not available on the current need for either service;
resilience to ensure that stress is tolerable rather than toxic
only utilization of services.
and to grow into well-rounded, healthy adults. For children,
mental health challenges can impact their ability to access
52 
Figure 18 No. of Children Under 9 Accessing Crisis
school or child care, develop peer relationships, and can
Services 2017-2020
have lifelong impacts.

There is a clear connection between toxic stress and mental
health. The Resilient Families & Communities chapter
265
starting on page 18 looks at indicators of toxic stress and
227     227
resilience as well as Vermont’s mitigation strategies.
197
The Need for Services
Children’s mental health conditions include depression,
2018
2017           2019    2020
anxiety, attention and behavioral concerns; 6% of children
under 3, 9% of children 3 to 5, and 20% of children 6 to 8
5
When longer term treatment is warranted, children are
have a behavioral, emotional or mental health condition.
placed in the care of licensed residential programs. In 2020,
out of 349 children ages 21 and younger in residential
54
care, 22 children were under the age of 9.
1 in 5 children between the ages of
In 2019, at the request of the State Advisory Council, BBF
6-8 has a behavioral, emotional or
and the Department of Mental Health convened an Early
mental health condition.
Childhood and Family Mental Health Task Force to identify
policy needs to reach a more integrated system and to
Vermont’s mental health system has multiple levels of
highlight existing, evidence-based, and successful strategies
intervention for children including: routine outpatient services,
in Vermont. The full report along with recommendations is
crisis services such as short term inpatient care, and longer
available at buildingbrightfutures.org/publications/.

52 
Figure 17
No. of Children Under 9 Served by Designated Mental Health Agencies 2000-2020

Payment reform started in January 2019

1917 2007 2409 2575 2644 3079 2839 3400 3185 3322 3171

2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020

22 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
CHILD DEVELOPMENT & EDUCATION

CHILD DEVELOPMENT
& EDUCATION
: 
VECAP GOAL 3 ALL CHILDREN
Vermont’s Early Childhood system includes many
AND FAMILIES HAVE ACCESS TO
services, resources, and supports to give children the
HIGH-QUALITY OPPORTUNITIES
best opportunity to succeed throughout their lives.
THAT MEET THEIR NEEDS

Starting during pregnancy and extending through age 8, the system meets child and family needs through creative and diverse
program designs, but can be complicated to navigate. As they grow and develop, Vermont children and families may participate in
home visiting, early care and education, early intervention, Head Start and Early Head Start, and PreK through Grade 3 education.
These programs are key components of the broader Early Childhood system supporting optimal child development, education
and family outcomes. State and community-based partnerships administer the programs, which differ based on regional needs
and strengths. As can be seen in Figure 19 on page 24, children and families may enter and exit the system based on their needs,
eligibility, and barriers to care. It is important children and families can access and receive services with minimal disruption.
Vermont continues to work on supporting families’ transitions among programs and services.

Several of these programs and services have not been featured in this report in previous years. In order to evaluate their
effectiveness it is important to examine patterns of service use and enrollment and identify gaps and barriers to continuity
of service provision to ensure that the Early Childhood system is meeting the needs of Vermont’s most vulnerable children.

The following section provides a snapshot of the range of services, resources, and supports Vermont offers to promote
optimal developmental and educational outcomes for children.

Table 3 Unduplicated (by Program) No. of Children
Vermont does not currently have the ability to track service
Being Served
provision and education across sectors and agencies to
produce an across-program unduplicated count. In March
Program Children Served
2020, the first unduplicated (within program) count of children
being served was compiled for the Preschool Development
Strong Families VT Home Visiting
395
Grant. As can be seen in Table 3, the count included children
being served as of October 1, 2019 (point-in-time count)
Child Care Financial Assistance
4,941
Program 
(CCFAP)
participating in 6 programs. In the near future, Vermont will
be able to provide an unduplicated count across programs
Head Start & Early Head Start
1,374
which will be incorporated into Vermont’s broader effort
to make data available to the public through visualization
IDEA Part C
1,084
platforms like the Vermont Education Dashboard (VED)
IDEA Part B
1,963
located on the Vermont Agency of Education’s webpage and
Vermont’s Early Childhood Resource, Data and Policy Center
Universal Prekindergarten Education
6,901
run by Building Bright Futures.

Strong Families Vermont Home Visiting
Through the Strong Families Vermont Home Visiting Program, both nurse and family support home visitors support pregnant
people and new parents through home visits delivered by trained professionals using a continuum of services. Home visitors partner
with each family to set goals and promote optimal development, health and well-being. Home visits also provide an opportunity for
early screening and identification of potential challenges facing families, as well as connections to the broader array of Children’s
Integrated Services (CIS) and other local services and supports. Using the point-in-time count on October 1, 2019, there were 395
children served by Strong Families Vermont Home Visiting.
How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 23
CHILD DEVELOPMENT & EDUCATION

implement a comprehensive Child Find system in order to locate,
identify, and screen children birth-22 who may be in need of a
referral for further evaluation.
Early Identification & Developmental Monitoring
Developmental monitoring and screening are tools to engage
Early Intervention
families in promoting healthy child development and to identify
(Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) Part C)
successes and concerns. In 2018, 63% of Vermont children
Early Intervention (EI) provides a broad array of services
had received a developmental screening in the first 3 years
such as speech and language therapy, physical therapy,
of life, although as can be seen in Figure 20, regional variation
occupational therapy, and other types of services to families
55 
exists. Identifying concerns early through developmental
with infants and toddlers identified with a developmental
monitoring and connecting families with concrete supports
delay, a disability, or a special health or medical condition.
like Early Intervention [Individuals with Disabilities Education
From December 2018 to 2019, there were 1,477 early
Act (IDEA) Part C] for children ages 0-3, and Early Childhood
56
intervention referrals and 2,130 total active children.
Special Education Services (IDEA Part B) for children ages 3-6,
provide children the greatest opportunity to overcome any delays
Data collected between 2014 and 2018, show that Vermont
and reach their optimal potential. IDEA requires all states to
has not seen significant change in the rate of children with
improved social and emotional skills upon exiting EI services
55 
Figure 20 Percent of Vermont Children Who Received
compared to when they entered (ranging from 69% to 76%).
a Developmental Screening in the First 3 Yrs of Life
However, there has been a steady increase from 76% in
2014 to 91% in 2018, in the percent of parents/families
80%
reporting EI has given them skills to help their child develop
80%
57
and learn.
70%
Children may exit EI services under several different
66%
66%
65%
64%
63%
circumstances. From December 2018 to 2019, 21% of
58%
children met all of their goals and were not in need of additional
54%
53%
50%
supports, 55% of children transitioned at age 3 to school district
Early Childhood special education services (ECSE) under IDEA
36%
Part B, and 7% were not found eligible to receive ECSE at age
34%
3. The remaining 17% were withdrawn by a parent or guardian,
moved out of the state, or were unenrolled after multiple
56
Vermont StateMiddleburyBurlingtonSt JohnsburyMorrisvilleSt AlbansBrattleboroRandolphBarreWhite River JctSpringfieldBenningtonRutlandNewport
unsuccessful attempts to contact the parent or guardian.

Figure 19 EC Resources, Services, & Supports Available by Age
Pregnancy Birth / 0 Age 1 Age 2

Strong Families Vermont Home Visiting
Children's Integrated Services
Early Head Start And Head Start
Parent Child Centers
Help Me Grow Vermont
Early Intervention
Early Care And Education (0-5)
Early Childhood Special Education Services & Special Education
Universal Prekindergarten Education
Early Elementary Education

24 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
Early Childhood Special Education Services
(Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) Part B)
The following overview of programs support and
Early Childhood Special Education Services (ECSE) supports
promote early identification and developmental
children ages 3 to 6 years with special education extending to
monitoring, referrals to services and resources, in
age 22. Individualized education plans (IEP) are developed and
addition to providing support directly to children and
implemented to ensure a child’s right to a Free and Appropriate
families. Of note, there are many more community-
Public Education (FAPE) under IDEA. Specialized instruction and
based, family-serving programs and resources in
related services are provided by the child’s local school district
addition to those listed below that support optimal
within a variety of public and community-based inclusive Early
outcomes for children and families in Vermont.
Childhood education settings. Students in grades K-3 mainly
receive special education and related services within their grade
Children’s Integrated Services (CIS)
level classroom at their local school. Table 4 indicates the
CIS offers four core services to families of young
number of students who received special education services
children facing challenges—Early Intervention (IDEA
based on having an individualized education plan (IEP) by grade
Part C), Specialized Child Care, Early Childhood and
58
level, starting with 3-5 year olds in PreK through grade 3.
Family Mental Health (ECFMH), and Home Visiting to
help ensure the healthy development and well-being of
58 
children, pre-birth to age 5. Between January 2020 and
Table 4 No. of children participating in Special
56
May 2020 CIS served 7,927 clients.
Education Services

Head Start (HS) and Early Head Start (EHS)
Education Level       No. of Children
Head Start and Early Head Start are comprehensive
early education programs for children from at-risk
backgrounds ages prenatal to five. From early math and
PreK
1591
reading skills to confidence and resilience, HS/EHS help
Kindergarten
937
children build the skills they need to be successful in
school and in life. In addition to helping children prepare
1st Grade
975
for kindergarten and beyond, HS/EHS help facilitate
critical health services like immunizations, and vision,
2nd Grade
971
dental, and hearing screenings.
3rd Grade
1099

Age 3 Age 4 Age 5 Age 6       Age 7 Age 8

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 25
CHILD DEVELOPMENT & EDUCATION

Early Care and Education Programs
Vermont Head Start and Early Head Start grantees
Access to affordable, high-quality early care and education
served over 1,810 at-risk children prenatal-to-five in 2018
programs (0-8), including afterschool and out-of-school
(90% were 3- and 4-year-olds). In FY18, 686 infants and
time hours (third space programs), affects more than
toddlers and 58 pregnant women were served by Vermont
Vermont’s parents and caregivers of young children; it
59
Early Head Start programs.
affects the businesses that employ them and our larger
economy.
Parent Child Centers
In October of 2019, there were 4,941 children receiving
Parent Child Centers (PCCs), deeply rooted in the
financial assistance through the Child Care Financial
Strengthening Families Framework, provide holistic
Assistance Program (CCFAP). With the average family
services that are family-driven, strength based, and
of four investing a fifth of their income on child care,
multi-generational all while building protective factors in
Vermont’s investments in CCFAP are aimed at making
children and families and addressing social determinants
24
child care more affordable.
of health. The network of 15 Parent Child Centers serve
Vermont’s early care and education system consists of a
all of Vermont with a focus on early identification,
mix of licensed and registered family child care programs,
intervention, and prevention through 8 Core Services
center-based programs, and school-based programs for
ensuring that families have the support and resources
children 6 weeks to 5-year-olds not in kindergarten. Figure
they need to nurture their children and get them off to
21 shows that the vast majority (83%) of children are
a great start in life: Parent Education, Parent Support,
enrolled in Center Based Childcare programs, followed
Home Visits, Early Childhood Services, Concrete Family
Supports, Playgroups, Community Development, and
62 
Information & Referral. In FY20, 49,828 participants
Figure 21 2019-2020 Enrollment in Regulated
60
were served across all 15 PCC programs.
Early Childhood Education Programs

Center Based Child Care
Help Me Grow Vermont (HMGVT)
Licensed Family Child Care
Help Me Grow VT (HMGVT) is a whole-population, public
10,896
health approach that utilizes and builds on existing
Registered Family Child Care
resources in order to develop and enhance a comprehensive
approach to Early Childhood system-building. To date,
over 400 providers are using Vermont’s developmental
2,316
screening registry including Early Childhood educators
1,880
1,156
and public school districts, Head Start and Early Head
745
Start programs, and health care and community service
693
providers. In 2019, Help Me Grow held 117 community
133
74
57
outreach events that reached 5,753 families and saw a
61
55% increase in calls and referrals.
3,066  2,699  12,185
Infants
Toddlers    Preschool
< 24 months
24-35 months     3-5 years

26 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
opportunities for improvement. Educational outcomes for young
children are difficult to measure and often subjective. Vermont
currently reports on three primary indicators to measure
children’s knowledge, skills, and behaviors: Teaching Strategies
Gold, the Agency of Education’s Ready for Kindergarten! Survey,
and Third Grade Language Arts (reading) and Math.

Of note, a gap currently exists between outcomes for children
entering kindergarten and outcomes measured at third
grade. Although there is no direct comparison between these
by Registered Family Child Care Programs (15%), and less
measures, as Early Childhood partners are committed to
than 2% of children enrolled in Licensed Family Child Care
62 
determining the best way to support and educate each and
Programs. This does not include Universal Prekindergarten
every Vermont child, further attention and investigation is
Education (UPK) through Act 166.
necessary to understand the factors impacting these early
Like families across the country, many Vermont families with
childhood education outcomes.
young children struggle to find regulated child care. Of children
who are likely to need care, 62% of infants, 27% of toddlers
Teaching Strategies Gold (TSGold)
and 30% of preschool-age children do not have access to
Act 166 requires annual child progress monitoring reporting in
any full day, full year regulated child care programs. 78% of
the areas of literacy/language, mathematics, and social and
infants, 56% of toddlers and 51% of preschool-aged children
emotional skills through Teaching Strategies Gold. As can be
do not have access to full day, full year high-quality child
seen in Figure 23, in the 2018-2019 school year, 85% or more
6
care programs.
of students assessed met or exceeded expectations across
literacy, math, and social emotional domains for both 3 and
Universal Prekindergarten Education
64
4 year olds.
In 2014, Vermont passed Act 166, also known as the
Universal Prekindergarten Education (PreK) law, which
64 
Percent of Children Meeting or Exceeding
Figure 23
offers all 3- and 4-year olds, and 5-year-olds not enrolled
Expectations Teaching Strategies Gold (TSGold) 2018-2019
in Kindergarten up to 10 hours a week of publicly-funded
3 yrs old 4 yrs old
PreK for 35 weeks of the academic year. As can be seen in
Figure 22, since 2014, the number of children enrolled in
63
public PreK has increased by more than 2,000.
92% 
89% 
88%
86% 86% 
85%
Educational Assessments
Vermont recognizes the importance of measuring educational
outcomes in addition to enrollment to understand the impact
Literacy Math Social Emotional
of programs, services, resources, and education, as well as

63 
Figure 22
Universal Prekindergarten Education Enrollment 2012/2013 to 2019/2020

5,675 5,817 6,213 7,301 8,115 8,815 8,594 8,594

2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015
2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018 2018-2019 2019-2020

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 27
CHILD DEVELOPMENT & EDUCATION

vary significantly based on race, economic status, and other
factors, as can be seen in Figure 24. Lower proficiency rates
are seen for Vermont’s most vulnerable children including
those students with disabilities and special health care
needs on IEPs, children experiencing homelessness, children
Ready for Kindergarten! Survey
from low income households, and those from historically
The Agency of Education’s Ready for Kindergarten! Survey
63
marginalized groups.
(R4K!S) is a readiness assessment of a kindergarten
student’s knowledge and skills within the first six to
65 
ten weeks of school. Kindergarten teachers assess
Table 5 Percent of Children "Ready" for Kindergarten in
students on 34 items across the following domains:
Vermont 2019-2020
Physical Development and Health, Social and Emotional
Development, Approaches to Learning, Communication,
Percent of Children "Ready" for Kindergarten in
and Cognitive Development.
Vermont 2019-2020 School Year

The data can help kindergarten teachers, schools,
Vermont
84%
school boards, families, and early childhood partners
assess student strengths and challenges. As can be
Boys
80%
seen in Table 5, children living in households who are
Girls
89%
income eligible for free and reduced lunch are less
likely to be ready for kindergarten (76%) compared
Free and Reduced Lunch Eligible
76%
65
to children from higher income households (89%).
Not Free and Reduced Lunch Eligible
89%
There has not been noteworthy change over time since
2015 in the percent of children ready for kindergarten.
Attended Publicly Funded PreK
85%
The Early Elementary Years
Did Not Attend Publicly Funded PreK
83%
At the end of third grade, Vermont students are assessed
Percent of Students Surveyed
82%
on their proficiency in reading and math. Proficiency rates

63 
Figure 24
Percent of Third Graders Proficient or Above in Reading
Reading Math
& Math Assessments by Characteristics 2018-2019

%
64
% 
%
%
62
66
% 
59
%
56
%
% 
53
% 
53
50
50
%
69
%
%
36
% 
35
% 
33
32
% 
%
21
18
%
16
% 
13
% Of 3rd Graders Proficient or Above
All Students FRL Eligible  Not FRL    IEP    No IEP   McKinney- Not McKinney- Historically
Historically
Eligible                Vento Eligible Vento Eligible Marginalized
Advantaged

28 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
REGIONAL PROFILES

About the Regions
BBF’s regional infrastructure has a presence in every corner of the state and in all communities. These 12 Regional Councils
bring together early childhood stakeholders to identify gaps; share expertise and resources to break down silos; elevate regional
and family voice; and implement strategies to respond to the needs of each and every child and family in their respective area.

Statewide, nearly 250 people bring their perspectives together on Regional Councils on a monthly basis. Early childhood
stakeholders across regional tables include professionals in physical and mental health, social services, basic needs, early
childhood education, PreK-12 education, families of children under 9, and community members invested in the well-being of
young children.

Regional councils serve as critical mechanisms to elevate regional innovations, successes, and barriers to state partners and
to implement state policies and best practices at the regional level.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 29
REGIONAL PROFILES

BBF REGIONAL PRIORITIES 2020
The following pages offer a snapshot of each region with a highlighted project and selected indicators of child
and family well-being.

Each Regional Council has an action plan to guide decisions and activities. While each plan covers the different
parts of the Early Childhood system, two priorities are identified to share across the state. The map below shows
the strengths of the regional council infrastructure in allowing for local priority setting as well as the connections
between regions across Vermont.

Orleans & Northern Essex
Franklin & Grand Isle
• Resilient children & families
• Food security & basic needs
• Child care workforce development
• Family safety & mental health

Caledonia & Southern Essex
Lamoille Valley
• Child care workforce development
• Family safety & mental health
• Family engagement & support
• Healthcare

Chittenden
• Substance use
• Diversity & inclusion
Central Vermont
• Food security & basic needs
• Family safety & mental health
Addison
• Resilient children & families
• Supporting an integrated system of care
Northern Windsor & Orange
• Child care workforce development
• Resilient children and families
Rutland
• Equitable access to services & supports
• Child care workforce development
Springfield Area
• Food security and basic needs
• Resilient children and families

Bennington
• Family safety & mental health
• Workforce development
Southeast Vermont
• Resilient children & families
• Child care workforce development

More information about each region including monthly council meetings and updates can be found at
buildingbrightfutures.org/what-we-do/regional-councils/

30 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
Addison
Since 2018, the Addison Regional Council has focused on fostering resilience within the
community. Public and private partners along with families and community members
joined together, launching a public awareness and education campaign for youth
resiliency called ‘OK, you’ve got this’ which is aligned with VECAP Goal 1: All Children
Have a Healthy Start.

During the Covid -19 pandemic, the campaign shifted to, “OK, We’ll get through this.”
to ensure family basic needs were met within the community. The project responded
by creating a resource page (bit.ly/COVID-OK) that includes a series of videos to offer
help with stress and the return to school. Throughout the region, trainings and activities
are offered for school staff, parents, early educators, and others in the community.
This resilience work reinforces the Early Multi-Tiered Systems of Support (EMTSS)
framework, and the Pyramid model which has been implemented in the region,
becoming part of a continuum of care for Addison County children.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)                  (2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(632)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
45 
2,901 34.0% 
Decreased by 4% from (3,007 in 2013) Decreased by 23% from (44.0% - 872 in 2013) Increased by 80% from (25 in 2014)

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Addison Central SD
91.6%
49.0%
Addison Northwest SU
84.4%
59.2%
Addison Rutland SU
84.2%
43.8%
Mount Abraham Unified SD
93.6%
47.5%

"OK, you’ve got this” continues to support families and help children
believe in their ability to handle life’s inevitable challenges.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 31
REGIONAL PROFILES

Bennington
The Bennington Regional Council has a long history of working together guided by regional
action plans since 2005. The Council continues to put the social emotional health of children
and their families at the forefront of their work together in line withVECAP Goals 1, 2, and 3.

Bennington uses the Devereux Early Childhood Assessment (DECA) across the region.
The DECA includes both parent and program components that together, help parents
and educators better understand children’s social and emotional strengths at home
and at school.

Bennington began updating its action plan in the summer of 2020. Small diverse groups
met to link the regional plan to council work. While the action plan is full of exciting and
innovative regional priorities, the actions and strategies supporting the outcome that,
‘Bennington will become a place of equity and inclusion’ resonate strongly across the
Council and the region.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)                  (2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(934)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
64 
3,061 47.2% 
Decreased by 8% from (3,323 in 2013) Decreased by 19% from (58.1% - 1,299 in 2013) Increased by 52% from (42 in 2014)

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Battenkill Valley SU
73.3%
44.4%
Bennington Rutland SU
88.9%
55.3%
Southwest Vermont SU
82.5%
36.5%
Windham Southwest SU
91.3%
Not Available

The aggregate information has given the region the ability to better
target professional development resources.

32 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
Caledonia & Southern Essex
The Caledonia and Southern Essex Regional Council continues to provide
professional development (PD) opportunities to support the early care and
education and PreK-3 workforce in the region in line with VECAP Goal 3: All Children
and Families Have Access to High-Quality Opportunities That Meet Their Needs. In
March, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the PD Committee quickly shifted from
planning in person workshops and a mini-conference to virtual training. Partners,
including the Early Childhood Network, CCV and Northern Lights, Kingdom Child
Care Connection, and April’s Teaching Tree have been key in identifying workshop
topics and needs of local early care and education and PreK-3 teachers.

"I loved this class! The first time I have ever taken anything like it. I liked the strategic
planning suggestions and the actual photos and ideas from other childcares. It brought
the visions to life. This class gave me a framework to start from and ideas that I am
excited to bring to fruition."
- A participant in the “Growing Outdoor Classrooms” workshop

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)                  (2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(907)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
27 
2,986 47.2% 
Decreased by 8% from (3,231 in 2013) Decreased by 9% from (52.0% - 1,034 in 2013) Decreased by 25% from (36 in 2014)

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Caledonia Central SU
79.7%
62.1%
Kingdom East
75.9%
43.8%
Orange East SU
63.6%
42.6%
St Johnsbury SD
88.9%
25.3%

It brought the visions to life. This class gave me a framework to start
from and ideas that I am excited to bring to fruition.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 33
REGIONAL PROFILES

Central Vermont
The Central Vermont Regional Council has spent much of the past year working to
address the basic needs of children and families in the wake of the crisis brought
about by the COVID-19 pandemic. In tandem with community partners, the Council
worked to address a variety of needs including housing, food, diapers, childcare
for essential workers and more. One particular focus was the issue of internet
connectivity. In response to this challenge the Council initiated a work group to
assess connectivity needs and explore ways to address them. With the help of
volunteers and financial and technical support from local businesses, the work-
group has provided devices and technical assistance to families in the region to
address this digital divide they were experiencing. The work-group continues to
meet lead by the Green Mountain United Way to provide assistance to families in
need in line with VECAP Goal 1: All Children Have a Healthy Start.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
POPULATION (2018)                  (2018)                     (2019)
IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(1,283)
under 9 
under 6 
under 9
59 
36.5% 
5,805 
Decreased by 7% from (6,216 in 2013) Increased by 2% from (35.9% - 1,395 in 2013) Increased by 23% from (48 in 2014)

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Barre SU
80.4%
43.0%
Central Vermont SU
73.3%
48.7%
Harwood Unified Union SD
92.2%
65.8%
Montpelier Roxbury SD
96.5%
53.4%
Orange Southwest SU
89.6%
44.8%
Washington Central SU
79.2%
58.4%
Washington Northeast SU
84.9%
29.4%

Families who lack appropriate devices or the funds to pay for an internet service
provider are unable to access school, telehealth and other essential services.

34 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
Chittenden
The Chittenden Regional Council provides opportunities for early childhood
professionals, cross sector community partners, and families to engage in
rich discussions, trainings, and projects in service of the community. Through
mutually reinforcing activities, the Council has committed to focusing on equity,
diversity, and inclusion practices by using an equity lens to drive all of the regional
work. The SUD - Making the Systems Work for Families Project is a result of the
Council coming together and recognizing the need for increased coordination of
services for young children and families impacted by Substance Use Disorder
(SUD). These efforts make use of the neutral Council table to take a deeper dive
into regional issues, map out the current delivery systems, and develop strategies,
across sectors, to improve upon existing systems. These regional priorities are
aligned with the VECAP Goal 3: All Children and Families Have Access to High-
Quality Opportunities That Meet Their Needs.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)                  (2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(2,617)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
88 
28.2% 
13,842 
Decreased by 3% from (14,215 in 2013) Consistent with 28.2% from (2,658 in 2013) Increased by 16% from (76 in 2014)

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Burlington SD
76.9%
47.5%
Champlain Valley SD
93.9%
55.8%
Chittenden East SU
95.7%
66.4%
Colchester SD
89.2%
55.5%
Essex Westford SD
86.3%
62.8%
Milton SD
92.5%
45.3%
South Burlington SD
83.2%
56.9%
Winooksi SD
75.8%
16.3%

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 35
REGIONAL PROFILES

Franklin & Grand Isle
The Franklin and Grand Isle Regional Council continues to prioritize concrete
supports for children and families, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. As the
Council continued to meet virtually, one of the largest focal points at the onset of the
pandemic was to ensure that children had access to appropriately-sized masks. Thus,
in collaboration with a local volunteer, the Council was able to purchase 500 masks
to be distributed throughout the region! The Council continued its commitment to
help families access basic needs such as food, toiletries and winter clothing. This
year the Council collaborated with Community Action, the Parent Child Center’s early
childhood programming, local food shelves to distribute masks throughout the
regions. With children slowly phasing into more and more in-person time in schools
and the community, these efforts have been a huge success in filling a gap for our
children. This work is in line with VECAP Goal 1: All Children Have a Healthy Start and
several regional council members attend the VECAP Child Outcomes Accountability
Team to help inform activities at both the region and state level.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)                  (2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(824)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
84 
5,945 52% 
Consistent with (5,962 in 2013) Decreased by 52% from (45.9% - 1,766 in 2013) Increased by 17% from (72 in 2014)

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Franklin Northeast SU
87.0%
42.9%
Franklin Northwest SU
84.4%
60.9%
Franklin West SU
90.0%
54.1%
Grand Isle SU
88.9%
52.7%
Maple Run SD
82.2%
37.8%

With children slowly phasing into more and more physical time in
schools and out in the community, this effort has been a huge success
in filling a gap for our children.

36 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
Lamoille Valley
Maternal and child health and well-being has been a significant focus area for the
Lamoille Valley Regional Council in line with VECAP Goal 1: All Children Have a Healthy
Start. The Council believes to do this well, it takes integration across health, education and
community supports to fully support families and young children. In order to encourage
greater collaboration and resource and information sharing, the Council has joined forces
with the local maternal and child health coalition to co-host monthly meetings.

The Council also supports the Lamoille Family Center and Appleseed Pediatrics DULCE
(Developmental Understanding and Legal Collaboration for Everyone) project team in their
efforts to perform comprehensive social determinants of health screenings for families
with newborns. Additionally, the Council continues to sponsor home visits and “Welcome
Baby” gift bags for families with newborns in the region. To support families during the
public health crisis while programs were not meeting in person, the Council and Lamoille
Family Center distributed activity bags with books, developmentally appropriate toys and
craft materials to support families even when they could not attend programs in-person.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)                  (2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(955)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
24 
2,927 47.4% 
Decreased by 8% from (3,184 in 2013) Increased by 13% from (42.1% - 908 in 2013) Increased by 26% from (19 in 2014)

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Lamoille North SU
72.9%
36.2%
Lamoille South SU
86.5%
56.6%
Orleans Southwest SU
92.6%
36.6%

Thanks to this integration, the Council has been able to move beyond
their traditional focus on childcare and education to explore many
aspects of maternal and child health.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 37
REGIONAL PROFILES

Northern Windsor & Orange
The Northern Windsor and Orange Regional Council continues to find ways to
support children's social and emotional well-being. One strategy the Council has
committed to is the Early Multi-Tiered Systems of Support (Early MTSS) framework
for children who are 5 years of younger in line with VECAP Goal 3: All Children and
Families Have Access to High-Quality Opportunities That Meet Their Needs. There is a
similar approach for school aged children called the Multi Tiered Systems of Support
(MTSS) framework that is modified based on developmental need. Aligning these
approaches and implementing the frameworks allows for children to experience a
smoother transition from early care and education programs to kindergarten. These
frameworks support the social, emotional, and behavioral development of young
children. The goal is to create an environment where every child feels good about
coming to school through practice based coaching, regional support and trainings.
The Council has worked to provide trainings, facilitate connections, and align
resources to support programs interested in participating in Early MTSS.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)                  (2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(1,126)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
33 
4,043 41.0% 
Decreased by 5% from (4,246 in 2013) Decreased by 1% from (41.5% - 1,132 in 2013) Decreased by 30% from (47 in 2014)

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Hartford SD
67.4%
53.9%
Orange East SU
63.6%
42.6%
Orange Southwest SU
89.6%
44.8%
Rivendell Interstate SD
100%
41.0%
SAU 70
90.9%
80.0%
White River Valley SU
83.3%
50.0%
Windsor Central SU
90.2%
66.6%
Windsor Southeast SU
85.0%
58.0%

38 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
Orleans & Northern Essex
The Orleans and Northern Essex Regional Council is continuing their priorities
of preventing adverse childhood experiences and strengthening resilience, and
supporting the well-being of the early childhood workforce. The Council is sponsoring
workshops that address stress, resilience, and how to re-envision well-being for
both children and early childhood educators during the COVID-19 pandemic. The
Council’s Early Multi-Tiered Systems of Support (Early MTSS) committee is actively
engaged in the implementation of the Early MTSS-123 Project, a pilot project led by
the University of Vermont designed to support regional leadership teams, building
local capacity, and developing a statewide plan for scaling-up and sustaining
implementation of the Pyramid Model and Strengthening Families in line with
VECAP Goal 3: All Children and Families Have Access to High-Quality Opportunities
That Meet Their Needs.

Learn more about the pilot project at bit.ly/EarlyMTSS123.

Current Status

CHILD
CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)
(2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION 
IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(739)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
50 
2,522 46.7% 
Decreased by 3% from (2,591 in 2013) Decreased by 23% from (44.0% - 872 in 2013) Increased by 257% from (14 in 2014)

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Essex North SU
100%
Not available
North Country SU
79.2%
35.1%
Orleans Central SU
74.6%
48.2%

Thank you so very much for your time, creativity, engagement, expertise and
energy in crafting and delivering a wonderful, engaging & helpful presentation for
providers, early educators & caregivers in our Northeast Kingdom! You have been WONDERFUL
with sharing yourself to our community through BBF.

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 39
REGIONAL PROFILES

Rutland
The Rutland Regional Council has focused on professional development and perinatal
health. In 2020, the Council established a Professional Development Team to create a
training schedule to best meet the needs of the region in line with VECAP Goal 3: All Children
and Families Have Access to High-Quality Opportunities That Meet Their Needs. These needs
evolved as a result of COVID-19, but the council continues to look for and offer support for Early
Childhood Educators serving families with complex needs, including children experiencing social,
emotional, and behavioral health issues and those with incarcerated family members.

In 2019, the Rutland region was awarded the Screening, Treatment, & Access for Mothers
& Perinatal Partners (STAMPP) grant. Perinatal mood and anxiety disorders (PMAD) are the
leading complications associated with pregnancy and childbirth. This grant brings a diverse
group of stakeholders together to support mothers and families by expanding perinatal
mental health services in Vermont through trainings, resource sharing, and support groups.
To support the grant, the Council shares information with their larger networks and provides
coordination and funding to fill gaps in regional implementation.

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)                  (2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(1,099)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
73 
4,948 36.3% 
Decreased by 4% from (5,139 in 2013) Decreased by 27% from (49.6% - 1,549 in 2013) Increased by 40% from (52 in 2014)

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Addison Rutland SU
84.2%
43.8%
Bennington Rutland SU
88.9%
55.3%
Greater Rutland County SU
83.3%
47.4%
Mill River Unified Union SD
78.2%
41.0%
Rutland City SD
68.5%
37.7%
Rutland Northeast SU
76.3%
44.0%
Two Rivers SU
91.7%
61.4%
Windsor Central SU
90.2%
66.6%

40 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
Southeast Vermont
The Southeast Vermont Regional Council continues to focus its resources on The
Basics, Vermont - a socio-ecological saturation campaign to support strong serve and
return relationships between children 0-3 and their parents and caregivers. The Basics
seeks to address both gaps in kindergarten readiness between sub-populations, and
to build child and family resilience. The Basics core team includes stakeholders from
multiple sectors and the campaign has connected the council to communities across
the country who are also implementing The Basics. This campaign recognizes and
empowers parents and caregivers as a child’s first teachers, and calls for the larger
community to prioritize the well-being of young children and families in line with VECAP
Goal 2: Families and Communities Play a Leading Role in Children’s Well-being.

"The Basics Vermont is a wonderfully supportive program that focuses on creating
lifelong bonds with children to nurture and support their growth and development!"

Current Status

CHILD
CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)
(2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION 
IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(774)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
79 
2,830 44.0% 
Decreased by 5% from (2,982 in 2013) Decreased by 4% from (46.0% - 924 in 2013) Increased by 76% from (45 in 2014)

Educational Assessments

SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Windham Central SU                                     47.6%
82.2%
Windham Northeast SU                                    50.6%
79.5%
Windham Southeast SU                                    52.8%
84.1%
Windham Southwest SU                                   Not Available
91.3%

It’s great to be celebrating families for the ways they are supporting their children
and offering suggestions for when they need inspiration. 
- Lexi, Putney

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 41
REGIONAL PROFILES

Springfield Area
The Springfield Area Regional Council in the past few years has focused on ensuring
that families are able to meet their basic needs. The Council has done this in a variety of
ways, whether that is ensuring that families have supplies needed for remote schooling
during the COVID-19 pandemic or making sure that families have access to diapers.
One new creative way the Council has helped support food security and nutrition
education is connecting early care and education programs to the Women Infants and
Children (WIC) program. Families enrolled in these programs are able to meet their
education requirements through programs put on at the early education centers and
can be seen by a WIC specialist at the centers, reducing barriers of transportation, and
time off of work as well as building relationships between partners in the region in line
with VECAP Goal 1: All Children Have a Healthy Start.

In addition to providing food and nutrition education, this connection has contributed to an
increase in WIC enrollment in the region!

Current Status

CHILD            CHILDREN LIVING       CHILDREN IN OUT OF
(2018)                  (2018)                     (2019)
POPULATION IN POVERTY HOME CUSTODY 

children
children
children
(904)
under 9
under 6 
under 9
33 
2,812 48.3% 
Decreased by 6% from (2,983 in 2013) Decreased by 9% from (52.8% - 1,006 in 2013) Consistent with 33 in 2014

Educational Assessments
SUPERVISORY                 KINDERGARTEN         3RD GRD READING
UNION / SCHOOL DISTRICT           READINESS (FALL 2019)         PROFICIENCY (SPRING 2019)
Bennington Rutland SU
88.9%
55.3%
Springfield SD
79.5%
43.6%
Two Rivers SU
91.7%
61.4%
Windham Central SU
82.2%
47.6%
Windham Northeast SU
79.5%
50.6%
Windsor Central SU
90.2%
66.6%
Windsor Southeast SU
85.0%
58.0%

42 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
LIMITATIONS
There are several limitations worth noting. Due to geographic variability and the small population of Vermont, small sample sizes
limit the ability for complex analysis and broad generalizations. Thus, the majority of data are counts and percentages and often
include proxy measures from national datasets due to the limited data available. For data collected and reported by Vermont’s state
agency partners, the timing of data collection and reporting varies among programs. Not all data reported is from the same year or
time period, but instead, captures a range of indicators from the last three years and heavily relies on Point-in-Time counts. In addition,
datasets focus on different child age ranges that may or may not be compatible across programs (e.g. some programs may focus on
children birth to age three, while others capture data on children birth to age six or age eight). Similarly, because some data are derived
from sampled surveys, several indicators are population-based while others are actual counts of children served.

As mentioned in the COVID-19 spotlight, the pandemic has impacted our current and future data on outcomes for children and
families for years to come, in ways we do not yet understand. In many cases, comparing existing data to 2020 data collected during
the pandemic will be challenging. For example, child education outcomes typically tracked annually (e.g. student progress on the
SBAC) were not documented for the 2019-2020 school year and will therefore be missing in longitudinal analyses. This report shows a
snapshot of data across sectors, however, reviewing indicators in isolation doesn’t represent the entire story without further context.

A systemic limitation is that Vermont currently lacks the resources to sufficiently collect and report data that answers key policy
and program questions due to antiquated data systems and a lack of dedicated staff time to data partnerships, collection and
reporting. This is exacerbated as many outcomes for children and families, as well as the Early Childhood system, are hard to
define and harder to measure. Point-in-time surveys are used to capture data instead of building the technological infrastructure
necessary to monitor change over time in services and child and family outcomes. Lastly, the complex and cross-sector nature of
the Early Childhood system means that integrating data across sectors and tracking outcomes longitudinally remains a challenge.

ACRONYMS
FSD: Family Services Division
ACE: Adverse Childhood Experience
(A Division of the Department for Children and Families)
AHS: Agency of Human Services
FSH: Family Supportive Housing
AOE: Agency of Education
IDEA: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
BBF: Building Bright Futures
IEP: Individualized Education Plan
BIPOC: Black, indigenous and people of color
MAT: Medication Assisted Treatment
BFIS: Bright Futures Information System
MCH: Maternal and Child Health
CANS: Child and Adolescent Needs and Strengths
NSCH: National Survey of Children’s Health
CCFAP: Child Care Financial Assistance Program
PCC: Parent Child Center
CDD: Child Development Division
(A Division of the Department for Children and Families)
R4K!S: Ready for Kindergarten Survey
CIS: Children’s Integrated Services
SAC: State Advisory Council
COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019
SD/SU: School District/Supervisory Union
CSHCN: Children with Special Health Care Needs
SHIP: State Health Improvement Plan
DA: Designated Mental Health Agency
SLDS: State Longitudinal Data System
DCF: Department for Children and Families
SNAP: Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
DMH: Department of Mental Health
TSGOLD: Teaching Strategies Gold
EC: Early Childhood
UPK: Universal Prekindergarten Education
ECFMH: Early Childhood and Family Mental Health
VDH: Vermont Department of Health
ECSES: Early Childhood Special Education Services
VECAP: Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan
EI: Early Intervention
WIC: Women Infants and Children
FPL: Federal Poverty Level

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 43
REFERENCES

1 Vermont Legislature (2010). An Act Relating to the Building Bright Futures   10 Department for Children and Families. Housing Opportunity Grant Program
(HOP) Annual Report - State Fiscal Year 2020. Retrieved from https://dcf.vermont.
Council. Vermont Act 104 S.268. Retrieved from http://www.leg.state.vt.us/
gov/sites/dcf/files/OEO/Docs/HOP-AR-2020.pdf
docs/2010/Acts/ACT104.PDF

11 Vermont Department of Health. (2020). Help Me Grow Vermont Quarter 2
2 110th Congress (2007). An Act to reauthorize the Head Start Act, to improve
Data. (Unpublished raw data)
program quality, to expand access, and for other purposes. Public Law 110-134 –
Dec. 12, 2007. Retrieved from https://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/
12 Department for Children and Families. FSD Quarterly Management Reports, Q3
hs-act-pl-110-134.pdf
annually. Data provided by the Division Quality Assurance Supervisor.

3 Vermont Department of Health. (2019) Population of Vermont AHS-VDH
13 Agency of Human Services: AHS Report Catalog Intakes by District for Total
Districts by Single Year of Age and Sex, 2018 (excel file). Retrieved from https://
Calls & Acceptance; Accepted Report Status for track assignment. Data provided
www.healthvermont.gov/health-statistics-vital-records/vital-records-population-
by the DCF Family Services Division Quality Assurance Supervisor.
data/vermont-population-estimates

14 Child Development Division. Child Care COVID-19 Impact August 2020 Survey
4 U.S. Census Bureau. (2019). Table B17024: Age by Ratio of Income to Poverty
Results. Awaiting publication.
Level in the Past 12 Months, Vermont (2014-2018), American Community Survey
5-Year Estimates. Retrieved from https://data.census.gov
15 Vermont Department of Health. Vaccines Administered – the Covid-19 Effect.
Retrieved from https://www.healthvermont.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
5 Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative. National Survey
pdf/IMR_Vaccines%20Administered_2019_2020_Covid_19_Effect.pdf
of Children’s Health, 2016, 2017, 2018. Data Resource Center for Child and
Adolescent Health supported by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
16 Vermont Afterschool. Map of Remote Learning Child Care Hubs. Retrieved
Services, Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), Maternal and
from http://www.vermontafterschool.org/hubs-map/
Child Health Bureau (MCHB). Retrieved from www.childhealthdata.org. Original
analyses of the 2016-2018 NSCH multi-year weighted data was conducted
17 Agency of Education. Data provided by AOE Data and Management Division
by Laurin Kasehagen, MA, PhD, an epidemiology assignee to the Vermont
Director. Unpublished
Department of Health. Variables K2Q30A/B; K2Q31A/B; K2Q32A/B; K2Q33A/B;
K2Q34A/B; K2Q35A/B; K2Q36A/B; and K2Q37A/B in the public use data file.
18 Vermont Department of Health. (2020). Vermont Vital Statistics Annual
Report 2018. Retrieved from https://www.healthvermont.gov/health-statistics-
6 Horwitz, J. (2020). Stalled at the start – Vermont’s child care challenge: An
vital-records/vital-records-population-data/vital-statistics-reports-and-maps.
analysis of the supply and demand for regulated child care for children birth
through five in Vermont. Published by Let’s Grow Kids. Retrieved from https://
19 U.S. Census Bureau (2019). Tables B09001, B09002, and B09018, Vermont (2014-
www.letsgrowkids.org/client_media/files/pdf/StalledatStart2020.pd
2018). American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates. Retrieved from data.census.gov

7 Department for Children and Families. (2020). Child protection in Vermont.
20 U.S. Census Bureau. (2019). Tables B01001A-G, I: Sex by age [race], Vermont
Retrieved from https://dcf.vermont.gov/sites/dcf/files/Protection/docs/2019-CP-
(2014-2018), American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates. Retrieved from
Report.pdf
https://data.census.gov

8 Building Bright Futures. Vermont’s Early Childhood Needs Assessment 2020.  21 Department for Children and Families. 3SquaresVT. Retrieved from https://dcf.
Retrieved from https://buildingbrightfutures.org/publications/        vermont.gov/benefits/3SquaresVT

22 Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (2018). 2018
9 Feeding America 2020. The Impact of Coronavirus on Food Insecurity.
Poverty Guidelines for the 48 Contiguous States and the District of Columbia.
Retrieved from https://www.feedingamericaaction.org/the-impact-of-coronavirus-
Retrieved from https://aspe.hhs.gov/2018-poverty-guidelines.
on-food-insecurity/

44 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
REFERENCES

23 U.S. Census Bureau. (2019). Table DP03: Selected Economic Characteristics,  35 Vermont Department of Public Service. Ability to shelter-in-place: Broadband
Vermont (2014-2018), American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates. Retrieved  access. Housing Data powered by Vermont Housing Finance Agency. Retrieved
from https://data.census.gov                  from https://www.housingdata.org/profile/pandemic-impact/broadband.

24 Vermont Joint Fiscal Office (2019). Basic Needs Budget and the Livable
36 op. cit., Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative. Indicator 6.13 and
Wage. Retrieved from https://ljfo.vermont.gov/assets/Subjects/Basic-Needs-
variables ACE1; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10; and K11Q43R in the public use data file.
Budgets/2c974b591b/2019-Basic-Needs-Budget-and-Livable-Wage-report-
FINAL-1-15-2019-v2.pdf
37 op. cit., Indicator 2.3.

25 Feeding America. Child Hunger and Poverty in Vermont. Retrieved from http://
38 op. cit., Indicator 2.4.
map.feedingamerica.org/county/2018/child/vermont.

39 Vermont Department of Mental Health (2019). Data provided by the Vermont
26 Hunger Free Vermont. School Meals. Retrieved from https://www.
Care Partners Data Repository. Unpublished
hungerfreevt.org/school-meals

40 Department for Children and Families (2020). Annual Report on
27 Department for Children and Families. Snapshot of Vermont Food Stamp
Outcomes for Vermonters. Retrieved from https://dcf.vermont.gov/sites/
Program: December 2019. Retrieved from https://dcf.vermont.gov/sites/dcf/files/
dcf/files/DCF/reports/DCF-Outcomes.pdf. Data note: Data is point-in-
ESD/Report/3SVTSnapshot%202019Dec.pdf
time as of 9/30 annually.
28 Vermont Department of Health, Maternal and Child Health Division. (2020).
41 Vermont Network. 2019 Data Snapshot. Retrieved from https://vtnetwork.org/
Title V five year needs assessment. Retrieved from https://www.healthvermont.
wp-content/uploads/2020/01/2019-VT-Network-Data-Snapshot-FINAL.pdf
gov/sites/default/files/documents/pdf/cyf_TitleV%20Needs%20Assessment.pdf

29 The Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2020). Kids count Data Center: Child Well-  42 Center for the Study of Social Policy. About Strengthening Families. Retrieved from
being Indicators & Data: Vermont Indicators. Children in low-income households  https://cssp.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/About-Strengthening-Families.pdf
with a high housing cost burden in the United States. Retrieved from https://
datacenter.kidscount.org/data#VT
43 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About Social Determinants of
Health. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/socialdeterminants/about.html
30 National Low Income Housing Coalition. Out of Reach 2020: Vermont.
Retrieved from https://reports.nlihc.org/oor/vermont
44 op. cit., Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative. Indicator 3.1.

31 National Center for Homeless Education. McKinney-Vento Definition of
45 op. cit., Indicator 3.4a.
Homeless. Retrieved from https://nche.ed.gov/mckinney-vento-definition/
46 op. cit., Indicator 4.1. 2019 data only due to rewording of questions.
32 Vermont Agency of Education. Number of McKinney Vento Eligible Children
Enrolled in School by Age. Unpublished.
47 op. cit., Indicator 4.2a.

33 Family Supportive Housing Program Annual Report: State Fiscal Year 2019.
48 Vermont Department of Health. Vaccine Coverage 2019. Retrieved from
Retrieved from https://dcf.vermont.gov/sites/dcf/files/OEO/Docs/FSH-AR-SFY2019.pdf
https://www.healthvermont.gov/sites/default/files/documents/pdf/IMR_
Vaccination%20Coverage%202019%20Annual%20Report.pdf
34 Henly, J. R., Adams, G. Insights on Access to Quality Child Care for Families
Living in Rural Areas. Published by the Urban Institute October 2018. Retrieved
49 Vermont Department of Health. 2018 PRAMS Highlights. Retrieved from
from https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/99149/insights_on_
https://www.healthvermont.gov/sites/default/files/documents/pdf/HS-Stats-
access_to_quality_child_care_for_families_living_in_rural_areas_1.pdf
PRAMS-Overview-2018.pdf

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 45
REFERENCES

50 Vermont Department of Health. Data provided by the Research and Statistics  57 Department for Children and Families. CIS Determinations Data. Retrieved from https://
Chief. Data Note: Data analysis was performed on the Vermont Uniform Hospital
dcf.vermont.gov/sites/dcf/files/CDD/Reports/Part_C/CIS-Determinations-Data.pdf
Discharge Data Set (VUHDDS) 2008-2018. Analyses were limited to discharges of
58 Agency of Education. Data provided by AOE Data and Management Division
live born Vermont residents at Vermont hospitals, excluding transfers from other
Director. Unpublished
facilities. Data were limited to Vermont hospitals. Newborns in this analysis were
identified by any mention of either ICD-9 CM diagnosis code 779.5 or ICD-10-CM
59 Vermont Head Start Collaboration Office. Vermont Head Start and Early Head
diagnosis code P96.1. Cases of iatrogenic NAS (ICD-9 CM 772.1x, 779.7, 777.5x,
Start needs assessment report. Retrieved from https://dcf.vermont.gov/sites/dcf/
777.6, 770.7 or ICD-10-CM P91.2x, P78.0x, P52x, P77x, P27x) were excluded from
files/CDD/Reports/VHSCOFinalNeedsAssessment2019.pdf
the NAS rate, but included in the non-NAS rate.

60 Parent Child Center Network. Data provided by PCCN Co-Chair.
51 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020). Breastfeeding Report Card.
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/data/reportcard.htm
61 Help Me Grow Vermont. 2019 Annual Report. Unpublished
52 Vermont Department of Mental Health. Number of children served by
Designated Mental Health Agencies 2000-2020. Unpublished
62 Vermont Department of Health. 2019-2020 Child Care Vaccination Coverage
Data. Awaiting publication.
53 Vermont Department of Mental Health. Number of children under 9 accessing
crisis services 2017-2020. Unpublished
63 Agency of Education. Vermont Education Dashboard. Retrieved from https://
education.vermont.gov/data-and-reporting/vermont-education-dashboard
54 Vermont Department of Mental Health. Number of children in Residential Care.
Unpublished
64 Agency of Education. 2020 Annual Evaluation of Pre-Kindergarten Education
Programs to Promote Optimum Outcomes for Children and to Collect Data that
55 Department of Vermont Health Access, Vermont Blueprint for Health.
Will Inform Future Decisions. Awaiting publication.
Community Health Profiles. Retrieved from https://blueprintforhealth.vermont.
gov/community-health-profiles
65 Agency of Education. Ready for Kindergarten! Survey (R4K!S) Report 2019-2020.
Retrieved from https://education.vermont.gov/sites/aoe/files/documents/edu-early-
56 Department for Children and Families. Data provided by Vermont’s IDEA Part C
education-ready-for-kindergarten-report-2019-2020.pdf
Administrator. Awaiting publication.

46 2020 REPORT How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?
Acknowledgments
The 2020 How Are Vermont’s Young Children and Families? report is truly a collaborative effort.

As the Executive Director of BBF, I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to the following agencies,
stakeholders and organizations for their contributions to developing content, identifying and sharing key topics and
providing data:

The Vermont Agency of Education, the Vermont Care Partners Data Repository, the Vermont Department for
Children and Families; Child Development Division, Children’s Integrated Services, Economic Services Division,
Family Services Division, the Office of Economic Opportunity, and the Vermont Head Start Collaboration Office,
the Vermont Department of Health, the Vermont Department of Mental Health, Help Me Grow VT, the Parent Child
Center Network, and Let’s Grow Kids. Thank you as well to the many families who shared the photographs that we
have been able to include in this year’s report!

I would also like to recognize the work of the BBF staff as a whole, and thank the Regional Coordinators for advising
on, and contributing to, the regional pages and for their content expertise throughout the report. I am grateful to the
Building Bright Futures State Advisory Council, the 12 Regional Councils, and the 7 Vermont Early Childhood Action
Plan Committees, namely the Data and Evaluation Committee, for their collaboration and guidance.

Finally, I would especially like to thank four key contributors. First, this year’s report would not have been possible
without the many contributions of Beth Truzansky, BBF’s Deputy Director in creating thoughtful alignment between
the report and Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP), content development and editing. Second, Dora
Levinson, BBF’s Data and Policy Director, was instrumental in executing all aspects of this year’s report from
partnering with data stewards, compiling and organizing data, and contributing her content expertise to drafting and
editing the report. Final editing and review support from Carolyn Wesley and Jen Olsen completed the team effort.
Thank you for your dedication, expertise and sense of humor as we worked to finalize this publication.

I continue to be inspired by our collective commitment to using the most up-to-date, high-quality data to inform
policy and service provision for young children and their families.

Dr. Morgan Crossman
Executive Director

Design & Layout
PUBLICATION INFORMATION
Creativecouch Designs
BBF 2020 Managing Editors
Morgan Crossman, Ph.D., M.A., Executive Director
Printing & Production
Beth Truzansky, Deputy Director
Building Bright Futures would like to thank the
Dora Levinson, MPH, Data and Policy Director
National Life Foundation for their generous
contribution to the production of this report.
National Data Compilation & Cleaning
Dave Lapoint, Technology Advisor

How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families?2020 REPORT 47
Vermont’s Early Childhood
Resource, Data, & Policy Center
Vermont’s legislature, statewide Early Childhood partners, and the Early Childhood Needs Assessment have
repeatedly highlighted the need for data to be centralized, accessible and understandable to inform policy.
Building Bright Futures created Vermont’s Early Childhood Resource, Data, and Policy Center to meet this need.

The Center includes the following components:
• A catalog of high-quality resources for families, communities, and early childhood professionals
• National and Vermont-specific datasets, data spotlights, and related policy recommendation briefs and fact sheets
• A scorecard to monitor indicators identified in Vermont’s Early Childhood Action Plan (VECAP)
• Reports and publications from BBF, agency, and community partners
• Recorded research presentations, webinars, and early childhood grand rounds
• A portal for stakeholders to ask questions about existing data, make recommendations for needed data,
and report data gaps and priorities

Paired with the How are Vermont’s Young Children and Families? report, the Center provides data and resources
on a full range of early childhood topics across sectors focused on children, families, communities, programs,
services or policy questions. By helping to raise the visibility of key issues affecting Vermont's children and families,
Vermont’s Early Childhood Resource, Data, and Policy Center makes it easier for leaders, policymakers, families, and
communities to use data to make informed policy and program decisions.

WWW.VERMONTKIDSDATA.ORG

Building Bright Futures
600 Blair Park, Suite 160, Williston, VT 05495
802-876-5010 | WWW.BUILDINGBRIGHTFUTURES.ORG